---
author: admin
date: '2005-12-01 01:43:43'
layout: page
slug: about-me
status: publish
title: About Me
wordpress_id: '613'
---

[![image](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5222/5566086106_54064d4eed.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5566086106/ "Untitled by albill, on Flickr")\
Feigning Holiness and Exuding Stillness

Hi. I'm Al Jigen Billings (and, no, my parents did not do that to me!).
I cover a lot of different topic areas here, which can seem confusing to
some people. This is more of a "you're sitting in my living room with
me" kind of blog rather than some hard hitting tech blog, political
punditry site, or the like. Be warned. I'm a geek and I like geek stuff
(hackerspaces, science fiction, role-playing games, you get the
idea...). I'm also a very active Buddhist and most of what I post tends
to focus on the Dharma. I'm a professional tech guy and work as a QA
Engineer in the Bay Area of California. My employer is the [Mozilla
Corporation](http://www.mozilla.com). MoCo, along with the larger open
source Mozilla Community, is the proud creator of the Firefox web
browser. Previously, I worked at Microsoft for nine years doing QA work
and customer facing work with feedback and blogs as a project manager
for the Internet Explorer team. All of my professional experience in
technology has been in the space of the Internet, browsers, and online
community work. I worked on Internet Explorer 4, 5, 6 SP2, and 7 (with a
stint working on MSN Explorer). I've been on the Internet since back in
1989 when we had to hack into a local dial-up at the University and work
out from there through telnet via intermediate university unix boxes. I
once ran a UUCP node, pagan.UUCP, back in the golden days, in order to
get Usenet and e-mail. I ran two different Seattle area modem-based
bulletin board systems in the late 80's and early 90's: **Revelstone**
and **The Sacred Grove**. I have an interdisciplinary Master of Art's
degree in Humanities from California State University, Dominguez Hills.
My concentration was Philosophy, specifically in the space of Philosophy
of Religion. My thesis focused on the late 19th century "Hermetic Order
of the Golden Dawn" and its beliefs and teachings concerning the nature
and structure of the human soul. You can download the entire PDF of my
thesis or preview 24 pages of it online at the [ProQuest
page](http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?did=1472152931&Fmt=2&clientId%20=79356&RQT=309&VName=PQD)
for it. After receiving my MA, I joined the [Five Mountain Buddhist
Seminary](http://www.five-mountain.org/), a non-denominational Mahayana
Buddhist seminary, from which I recently graduated. I now teach a number
of classes within it. I am a Buddhist practitioner with a background in
Tibetan Vajrayana and other forms of Mahayana Buddhism with connections
to both Japanese Tendai and Korean Zen (Sŏn). I am an ordained priest
within the [Five Mountain Sangha](http://www.fivemountain.org), a modern
order in the Korean Sŏn lineage of Zen Master
[Sŭngsan](http://www.koreanbuddhism.net/master/priest_view.asp?cat_seq=10&priest_seq=20&page=3)
(Seung Sahn). My ordained name in Japanese is “Jigen,” meaning “Eye of
Compassion.” In Korean, it is “Jăan” and is written in Chinese
characters as “慈眼”. For reasons of history, I go by "Jigen" when
functioning as a priest. Our school follows the model of "lay priest"
common in Japan and with some Korean orders so I am a householder, not a
celibate monastic. I live in the world, just like everyone else, and
deal with the same problems and struggles. I am on the board of
directors of two small religious non-profits. One is the Buddhist temple
with which I am affiliated and the other is a Neopagan one in Utah
started by my mother, which focuses on chaplaincy and care-giving work
for Neopagans, especially those who are incarcerated. I am also the
president and on the board of [Ace Monster
Toys](http://acemonstertoys.org), a
[hackerspace](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hackerspace) established in
2010 in Oakland, California. We are a California a non-profit
organization applying for 501(c)(3) status federally. When not engaged
in various Buddhist things or my work, much of my time is spent focusing
on Ace Monster Toys during the week. I live in the Oakland, California
with my wife, R, to whom I was married in 2004. I have a fifteen year
old daughter from my previous marriage who lives in Seattle with her
mother. If you need to contact me, e-mail me through 'albill' at this
domain. (*Be warned, I get a lot of e-mail and may not immediately
respond to unsolicited contacts.*)

[![Al doing manly
welding](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3607/3354500083_f3f0084966.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3354500083/ "Al doing manly welding by albill, on Flickr")\
A Little Welding Action!
