---
author: admin
date: '2010-03-10 15:42:15'
layout: page
slug: cultivating-stopping-and-contemplation
status: publish
title: The Dharma Essentials for Cultivating Stopping and Contemplation
wordpress_id: '3063'
---

## The Dharma Essentials for Cultivating Stopping and Contemplation

### By Chih-i of T'ien-t'ai Mountain's Dhyana Cultivation Monastery

*Translated into English by Dharmamitra*

-   [Introduction](#1)
-   [Chapter 1](#2)
-   [Chapter 2](#3)
-   [Chapter 3](#4)
-   [Chapter 4](#5)
-   [Chapter 5](#6)
-   [Chapter 6](#7)
-   [Chapter 7](#8)
-   [Chapter 8](#9)
-   [Chapter 9](#10)
-   [Chapter 10](#11)

### Master Chih-i's Introductory Discussion

**First, the introductory section. (2) Part one: Citing a quatrain to
indicate the grand design.** To refrain from doing any manner of evil,
To respectfully perform all varieties of good, To carry out the
purification of one's own mind: This is what constitutes the teaching of
all buddhas. **Next, the introductory section proper, a delineation of
the conditions occasioning the creation of this text. (5) First, a brief
indication of the essential nature of stopping and contemplation.** As
for the dharma of nirvana, there are many paths of entry into it.
However, if we discuss those which are crucially essential, they do not
go beyond the two dharmas of stopping and contemplation. **Next, a
commendation of the marvelous functions of stopping and contemplation.**
How is this so? Stopping constitutes the initial method whereby one is
able to suppress the fetters. Contemplation is the primary essential
whereby one is able to cut off the delusions. Stopping then is the
wholesome provision with which one kindly nourishes the mind and
consciousness. Contemplation then is the marvelous technique which
stimulates the development of spiritual understanding. Stopping is the
supreme cause for the manifestation of dhyana absorption.(8)
Contemplation is the origin of wisdom. **Third, clarification of the
supreme benefits of stopping and contemplation. (2) First, the
clarification proper.** If a person perfects the two dharmas of
meditative absorption and wisdom, this then constitutes the complete
fulfillment of the dharma of benefitting both oneself and others.
**Next, a scriptural citation.** Hence The Dharma Blossom Sutra states,
"The Buddha himself abides in the Great Vehicle. Such dharmas as he has
realized are enhanced by the power of meditative absorption and wisdom.
He employs these in the deliverance of beings." **Fourth, explanation of
the undesirable aspects of deficiencies produced through unequal
[cultivation of] stopping and contemplation. (2) First, the explanation
proper.** One must realize that these two dharmas are like the two
wheels of a cart and like the two wings of a bird. If the cultivation of
them becomes one-sided one one falls and is overturned by that
deviation. **Second, scriptural citation.** Thus, one of the Sutras
states, "If one is one-sided in the cultivation of dhyana absorption and
merit and thus neglects the study of wisdom, this results in delusion.
If one indulges in the one-sided study of wisdom and thus neglects the
cultivation of dhyana absorption and merit, this results in craziness.
Although there are some minor differences in the faults inherent in
delusion and craziness, still, the erroneous views which develop from
the two conditions are generally no different. If one is unequal in [the
cultivation of these disciplines], this then results in the perfection
of deviation. How then could one possibly be able to swiftly ascend to
the most ultimate of results?" **Fifth, scriptural citation and
explanation of the utter necessity of evenly-balanced advancement in
stopping and contemplation. (2) The scriptural citation illustrating
importance.** Hence, one of the Sutras declares, "Because the Hearers
are most developed in the power of meditative absorption, they are
unable to perceive the Buddha nature. The Bodhisattvas abiding at the
level of the Ten Dwellings are most developed in the power of wisdom.
Although they do perceive the Buddha nature, still, they have not become
entirely clear about it. The powers of meditative absorption and wisdom
are equally developed in the Buddhas, the Thus Come Ones. Consequently,
they possess absolute understanding and perception of the Buddha
nature." Extrapolating from this, how could stopping and contemplation
not constitute the essential entryway unto the great result of nirvana,
the supreme path for the cultivation of the practitioner, the point of
confluence for perfection of the manifold virtues and the actual
substance of the unsurpassed and ultimate result?" **Next, clarifying
the rationale in this explanation of stopping and contemplation.** If
one understands accordingly, then it will be quite apparent that this
Dharma entryway of stopping and contemplation is truly not a shallow
one. When one desires to draw in and lead along those who are new to the
study of this discipline so that they may develop beyond their untutored
understanding and advance along the Way, it is easy to discourse on the
subject but difficult to implement the practice. [This being the case,]
how could one justify launching into extensive discussions of the
abstruse and marvelous? **Next, the doctrine proper. (2) First, a
general delineation of the ten concepts involved in the cultivation of
stopping and contemplation with notes of encouragement and admonishment.
(3) First, encouragement.** Now, we shall briefly explain ten concepts
in order to reveal to the novice practitioner the steps traversed in
ascending via the orthodox Way as well as the stages passed through in
progressing toward the entry into nirvana. The investigator should adopt
appropriate humility with regard to the difficulty of succeeding in
one's cultivation and thus not demean this text's shallowness and ready
accessibility. **Next, offering cautionary advice.** If one's mind
correctly gauges the import of these words, then in the blink of an eye
one's qualities of wisdom and severance will grow beyond measure while
the depths of spiritual faculties and intelligence will become
unfathomable. If, however, one disingenuously seizes on passages out of
context or, due to emotional biases, contradicts the instructions of the
text, then the months and years will be needlessly drawn out while
actual realization will have no basis for development. One's
circumstance then would be like that of the pauper who spends his time
calculating the wealth of other men. What possible benefit could this
have for oneself? **Third, listing the sections and revealing the
intent. (2) First, listing the section titles.** First, fulfillment of
[the prerequisite] conditions. Second, renunciation of desire. Third,
casting off the coverings. Fourth, regulation [of five crucial factors].
Fifth, [employment of the correct] skillful means. Sixth, cultivation
proper. Seventh, manifestations [arising from roots (9)] of goodness.
Eighth, awareness of demonic influences. Ninth, curing disorders. Tenth,
realization of the fruits. **Next, clarifying the intent of the listed
sections.** Now, we shall briefly treat these ten concepts in order to
instruct the cultivator of stopping and contemplation. These are crucial
essentials for the initial phase of learning to sit [in dhyana
meditation]. If one is well able to grasp their intent and thus proceed
to cultivate them, one will be able to settle the mind, avoid
difficulties, manifest meditative absorption, develop understanding, and
achieve realization of the non-outflow fruits gained by the
Superiors.(10) [End of Master Chih-i's Introductory Discussion] **End
Notes** 7. These page numbers refer to the most widely available modern
commentary on this work: Syou-syi jr-gwan dzwo-chan fa yao jyang shu, by
Dharma Master Bao Jing. Hong Kong: Syang-gang fwo-jing lyou-tung chu,
1971. The text is also available in the Taisho tripitaka (T46.1915). 8.
"Absorption" renders the Chinese "ding (4)" which in turn typically
corresponds to the Sanskrit "samadhi". Where it is not preceded by the
word "dhyana" I render it as "meditative absorption." 9. "Roots" in a
Buddhist context refer to the relative strength of specific karmic
propensities rooted in the karmic activity of former existences. For
instance, one who has studied under countless buddhas across the course
of a Ganges' sands number of aeons would most likely possess very sharp
faculties as regards instinctively moral conduct, ease of entry into
meditative absorption, and a deep resonance with transcendental wisdom.
10. "Superior" renders the Chinese "sheng (4)" which typically
corresponds to the Sanskrit "aarya." It's actually a technical term
which generally refers to anyone who has realized the Path of Seeing. It
carries the additional connotation of "saint" or "holy one" either of
which I would be pleased to employ were it not for the misleading
Christian-tradition associations of those terms. Bhikshu Dharmamitra
retains the copyright to this document. Although all rights are
reserved, downloading, printing out from a personal computer,
photocopying, and free-only distribution of separate unbound single
sections only is expressly permitted & encouraged so long as such
photocopying and distribution retains the copyright statement found in
each section and so long as no charge whatsoever is made to recipients.
Inclusion of any of this copyrighted material in other publications,
whether electronic, on the Internet (except for links), or printed
(except for short sections for review or other fair-use purposes)
requires prior written permission. Binding together of separate sections
into "books" is expressly disapproved.

### Chapter One: Fulfillment of [the Requisite] Conditions

[A) Upholding the Precepts Purely](#a) [B) Ensuring Adequacy of Clothing
and Food](#b) [C) Obtaining an Easeful and Quiet Dwelling Place](#c) [D)
Putting All Responsibilities to Rest](#d) [E) Drawing Near to Good and
Knowledgeable Friends](#e) **The direct exposition of the ten sections.
(10)** **A) Upholding the precepts purely. (2) First, generally
clarifying the essentials of upholding the precepts.** Now, having
generated the resolve to take up the practice, one who desires to
cultivate stopping and contemplation must first fulfill five conditions
related to external phenomena. The first among them is the requirement
that one must be pure in upholding the precepts. This is as stated in
one of the Sutras, "It is in dependence upon and [directly] because of
these precepts that one succeeds in developing the dhyana absorptions as
well as the wisdom which puts an end to suffering. Therefore the
bhikshu(11) should be pure in upholding the precepts." **Next, the
specific clarification of the characteristics of three levels of
upholding the precepts. (3) First, the superior level of upholding the
precepts.** In this regard, there are three classes of cultivators
according to differences in the upholding of precepts. The first is as
follows: Prior to becoming a disciple of the Buddha [this cultivator]
did not commit any of the five nefarious offences.(12) Later he
encountered a good master who taught him to accept the three refuges and
the five precepts, whereby he became a disciple of the Buddha. If he
succeeded in leaving the home life he first took on the ten precepts of
the Shrama.nera and then later received the complete precepts becoming
thereby a bhikshu or [in the case of a woman] a bhikshuni. From the time
of first taking precepts, he [or she] has been pure in guarding and
upholding [the precepts] and thus has been entirely without
transgression. In the upholding of the precepts, this person is of the
superior grade. One should understand that in cultivating stopping and
contemplation, such a person as this will certainly achieve realization
in those dharmas of the Buddha. [A cultivator] such as this may be
likened to a robe which is perfectly clean and which thus will easily
absorb the appropriate dye. **Second, the middling level of upholding
the precepts.** In the case of the second, after having received the
precepts, although there have been no transgressions of the major
precepts, still there have been many breaches of minor prohibitions. If
for the sake of cultivating meditative absorption, [such a cultivator]
is able to carry out repentance in a manner prescribed by Dharma, he too
may be referred to as one whose upholding of the precepts is pure and he
too shall be able to develop meditative absorption and wisdom. Such an
individual may be compared to a robe which, although once soiled, has
nonetheless been entirely cleaned such that dye will take in this case
as well. **Third, the inferior level of upholding the precepts. (2)
First, repentance according to the methods of the Great Vehicle. (3)
First, clarification of the ability or inability to repent according to
the Great and Lesser Vehicles.** In the case of the third, having
received the precepts, one was unable to guard and uphold the precepts
with a firm mind and thus there has been much transgression of both
minor and major prohibitions. According to the approach of the Lesser
Vehicle, there is no method whereby one may repent and be purified of
transgressions against the four major prohibitions. If however one
resorts to the approach of the teachings of the Great Vehicle, there is
still a means whereby [such offenses] may be extinguished. **Next,
citation of evidence that one who is able to repent becomes a healthy
person.** Accordingly, one of the Sutras notes, "Within the Buddha's
Dharma, there are two types of healthy people: those who have committed
no evil deeds whatsoever and those who, having committed them, have been
able to repent of them. **Third, repentance directly according to the
methods of the Great Vehicle. (2) i First, implementation through
according with ten dharmas which assist repentance. (4) a [First,
enumeration of the ten dharmas which assist repentance.]** Now as for
the one who is desirous of repenting [transgressions of the
prohibitions], it is essential for him to fulfill ten dharmas which
assist the success of his repentance: First, understand and believe in
cause and effect; Second, develop extreme fearfulness; Third, give rise
to a deep sense of remorse; Fourth, seek out a method to extinguish
offenses. This refers to the methods of practice explained in the Great
Vehicle sutras. One should cultivate them in accord with the Dharma;
Fifth, completely confess the prior offenses; Sixth, cut off the thought
of continuance [of the offenses confessed]; Seventh, bring forth the
resolve to serve as a protector of Dharma; Eighth, make great vows to
deliver beings; Ninth, constantly be mindful of all buddhas of the ten
directions; Tenth, contemplate the nature of offenses as being
unproduced. **b Second, revealing the duration of the dharma of
repentance.** If one is able to carry out these ten dharmas, one should
then proceed to adorn the site for cultivating the Way, bathe one's
body, clothe oneself in clean robes, burn incense and scatter flowers.
Then, in front of the Triple Jewel, one should carry on the practice of
repentance in accord with the Dharma, doing so for one week or three
weeks, or perhaps for one month or three months, or perhaps continuing
on for a year or more during which one repents singlemindedly of the
grave offenses involved in transgressing the prohibitions, stopping only
once one has succeeded in extinguishing [those offenses]. **c Third,
revealing the signs which indicate the extinguishing of offenses.** How
is one to recognize the signs that grave offenses have been
extinguished? As the practitioner carries out the repentance in this
fashion and with an utterly sincere mind, if he experiences his body and
mind becoming light and pleasant and also experiences a fine and
auspicious dream, or if perhaps he sees all manner of magical,
auspicious and rare signs, or if perhaps he becomes aware of his
wholesome thoughts opening forth and developing, or if perhaps, while he
is seated in meditation, he becomes aware of his body as like a cloud or
a shadow, and then from this point on gradually achieves realization of
the psychic states characteristic of the dhyanas, or if perhaps he
experiences the powerful and sudden arisal of awakened thought whereby
he is well able to recognize the marks of dharmas and is able to
understand the meaning and connotation of whichever sutra he encounters
and then realizes from this Dharma bliss and a mind no longer beset by
worry or regret, -- all manner of causes and conditions such as these
should be recognized as signs indicating that the Way-obstructing
offenses resulting from breaking the precepts have been extinguished.
**d Fourth, clarification that solid upholding [of the precepts] after
repentance constitutes purity.** If from this point on one firmly
upholds the restrictive prohibitions, this too constitutes purity in
shiila. [Such a practitioner] may be able to cultivate dhyana
absorption. He may be likened to a torn and soiled robe which one has
been able to patch and wash clean such that it may still be dyed and
worn. **ii Second, repentance according to the Great Vehicle's principle
of signlessness. (2) a First, the explanation proper.** If a person has
transgressed against one of the major prohibitions and perturbation thus
obstructs his achieving dhyana absorption, even though he may not be
able to rely upon cultivating practices methods set forth in the Sutras,
still, he may simply bring forth extreme remorse, go before the Triple
Jewel, confess his former offenses, cut off any thought of continuing
[any such offenses], and then may take up the practice of constantly
sitting [in meditation] with his body erect, contemplating the nature of
offenses as empty, remaining mindful of the Buddhas of the ten
directions. Whenever he emerges from dhyana he must, with an ultimately
sincere mind, burn incense, bow in reverence, repent and then recite the
precepts and recite the Great Vehicle sutras as well. The grave offenses
which obstruct the Way should naturally and gradually become
extinguished. On account of this his shiila(13) becomes pure and thus
dhyana absorption may develop. **b Second, citation of evidence.**
Accordingly, The Sutra on the Marvelous and Superior Meditative
Absorption states, "If after a person has transgressed against a major
precept his mind becomes beset by fearfulness and he thus desires to
seek the extinguishing [of that offense], there is no other means aside
from dhyana absorption which can be successful in extinguishing it. In a
deserted and quiet place, this person should focus his mind and engage
in the practice of constantly sitting in meditation while also
proceeding to recite the Great Vehicle sutras. All of the grave offenses
will be entirely extinguished and all of the dhyana absorptions will
naturally manifest before him." **B) Ensuring adequacy of clothing and
food. (2) First, clothing. (3) First, the clothing of one of superior
roots.** As for the second, the requirement that clothing and food be
adequate, there are three approaches associated with clothing [in
particular]: The first is as exemplified by the Great Master of the
Snowy Mountains(14) who happened to obtain a single cloak adequate to
cover up his body and took that to be adequate on account of the fact
that he never encountered people and additionally had perfected the
ability to endure [the elements]. **Next, the clothing of one of
middling roots.** The second category is that exemplified by
Mahaakaashyapa who, because he always cultivated the dhuuta
practices,(15) wore only a single three-part rag robe and accumulated no
other clothing. **Third, the clothing of those of inferior roots.** The
third category relates to countries where the weather is often cold and
to individuals whose endurance abilities are not yet perfected. In these
cases the Thus Come One also permitted the accumulation of a hundred and
one other things aside from the three-part robe. However it was
necessary to purify them verbally(16) and it was also necessary to
refrain from being excessive and necessary to be satisfied with the
appropriate amount. Were one to allow oneself to overindulge by being
acquisitive and desirous of accumulation [of material objects], then the
mind would become disrupted and they would become an obstacle to the
Path. **Next, sustenance. (3) First, the sustenance of those of superior
roots.** Next, as for the categories relating to food, there are four,
the first of which is that exemplified by the superior man and great
master who dwells deep in the mountains having entirely severed
relations with the world, eating the native herbs and fruits according
to the season and succeeding thus in supplying the requirements of the
body. **Second, the sustenance of those of middling roots.** As for the
second, he constantly cultivates the dhuuta practice of accepting only
food which has been obtained on the alms round. Through the practice of
accepting only alms food one is able to curb four types of unsuitable
livelihood. [Such a practitioner] relies exclusively upon correct
livelihood to maintain life because he is thereby able to bring forth
the Way of the Superior. As for the inappropriate livelihoods, they are:
first, obtaining food through inferiorly-directed endeavors; second,
obtaining food through upwardly-directed endeavors; thirdly, obtaining
food through endeavors directed at the midpoints; and fourth, obtaining
food through endeavors directed to the directions.(17) **The sustenance
of those with inferior roots.** The third involves residing in an
ara.nya(18) where a daanapati(19) brings offerings of food. The fourth
is where one lives among the Sangha and eats pure food. Where one has
the advantage of sustenance arrangements such as these, then this is
what is meant by achieving adequacy in food and clothing. Why is this?
If one does not have circumstances such as these the mind will not be at
peace and thus this will constitute an obstacle to the Way. **[C)
Obtaining an easeful and quiet dwelling place.]** The third [among the
five prerequisite conditions] requires that one find an easeful and
quiet dwelling place. One who is in a state of ease is not working at
doing manifold tasks and so this is what we mean when we stipulate
"easeful." A quiet place is one in which there is no commotion
whatsoever. There are three types of places where one may be able to
cultivate dhyana absorption. The first is deep in the mountains in a
place cut off from people. The second is an ara.nya dedicated to dhuuta
practices which is no closer than a mile or so from a village.(20) In
this case the noise of cattle will be cut off and there will be no
commotion. The third is within the confines of a pure sa.nghaaraama(21)
far from the dwellings of laypeople. All of these constitute quiet
places suitable for easeful dwelling. **[D) Putting all responsibilities
to rest.]** The fourth [of the five prerequisite conditions] is that one
put all responsibilities to rest. This involves four specific ideas:
First, one must put to rest all responsibilities relating to making a
living and must not perform any sort of work in the realm of the
conditioned. Secondly, one must put to rest all interpersonal
responsibilities. One must not seek out ordinary people, friends,
relatives or intellectual associates. One must entirely cut off all
interactions having to do with other people. Thirdly, one must put to
rest all responsibilities relating to arts or crafts and must not pursue
any activities involving skilled worldly trades, art, medicine, mantric
activities, physiognomy, keeping books, carrying out calculations and
other such matters. Fourthly, one must put to rest all responsibilities
relating to study matters. One must put aside reading, reciting,
listening, studying and so forth. This is what is meant by putting all
responsibilities to rest. Why is this necessary? If one is involved in
many responsibilities then matters related to cultivating the Way will
deteriorate. The mind will become disturbed and difficult to focus.
**[E) Drawing near to good and knowledgeable friends.]** The fifth [of
the five prerequisite conditions] requires that one draw near to a good
and knowledgeable friend. Good and knowledgeable friends are of three
types: The first is the "externally-protecting" good and knowledgeable
friend who provides necessary provisions, makes offerings, and is well
able to take care of the practitioner's needs, doing so in a fashion
which precludes any mutual disturbance. The second is the "identical
practice" good and knowledgeable friend together with whom one
cultivates a single path. Each provides the other with encouragement and
inspiration, and refrain from bothering or disturbing each other. The
third is the "instructive" good and knowledgeable friend who employs the
internal and external skillful means pertaining to the Dharma entryway
of dhyana absorption as a means to instruct and delight. This is the
conclusion of the summary clarification of the five kinds of necessary
prerequisites. [End of Chapter One] 11. In the generic context of Indian
religious traditions, a "bhikshu" is a mendicant. In the specific
context of Buddhism, a "bhikshu" is fully-ordained monk. 12. The five
nefarious offenses are: patricide; matricide; killing an arhat; spilling
the blood of a buddha; and, causing a schism in the harmoniously-united
[monastic] Sangha. 13. "Shiila" is the Sanskrit term for the practice of
moral conduct. 14. This refers to Shakyamuni Buddha's period of
cultivating ascetic practices in the Himalayas in this lifetime and also
to his cultivation in the mountains in previous lives while coursing
along the bodhisattva path. 15. "Dhuuta" practices refers to a dozen
relatively ascetic practices which were allowed by the Buddha. They
included such practices as eating but a single meal each day, sitting up
while sleeping at night, etc. They tend to reinforce certain aspects of
spiritual cultivation and are to be distinguished from the
non-beneficial ascetic practices which the Buddha specifically
discouraged (such as lying down on a bed of nails, covering oneself with
ashes, etc.). 16. Verbal purification refers to a mental contemplation
attended by a verbal statement wherein a monastic offers material goods
in excess of one's most basic needs to the Triple Jewel (Buddha, Dharma,
and monastic Sangha), requesting that they compassionately accept their
ownership. One then becomes able to use them without the assumption that
they belong specifically to oneself. The practical utility of this
practice is that it tends to discourage attachment to personal material
possessions. 17. According to Shaariputra's classic explanation narrated
by Naagaarjuna in the third fascicle of The Treatise on the Great
Perfection of Wisdom, "Upwardly" refers to such professions as
meteorological and astronomical prognostications, "Inferiorly" refers to
the blending of herbs, tilling the soil, planting fruit trees and so
forth, "midpoints" refers to occult professions involving mantras,
oracles, omens and so forth, and "directions" refers to manipulation and
flattery of the rich and powerful through sending off in all four
directions messages intended to obtain their favors. 18. An ara.nya is a
quiet forest dwelling. 19. A daanapati is a layperson who provides for
the material needs of the monastic Sangha. 20. Literally: "no closer
than three or four li to a village." 21. A sa.nghaaraama is a monastic
dwelling place.

### Chapter Two: Renunciation of Desires

[Desire for "Forms"](#1.2) [Desire for Sounds](#2.2) [Desire for
Fragrances](#3.2) [Desire for Flavors](#4.2) [Desire for
Touchables](#5.2) [A Summary Discussion of Desire](#6.2) As for the
above-listed "renunciation of desire," this refers to the five [objects
of] desire. When one wishes to endeavor at sitting in dhyana cultivating
stopping and contemplation, it is absolutely essential to renounce them.
As for the five desires, this refers to worldly forms, sounds, smells,
tastes and touchables. They are ever able to deceive and delude all
ordinary people causing them to develop fond attachment. If one is able
to become deeply aware of the negative consequences of desires, one will
not become involved with them. This is what is meant by renouncing
desire. First, the renunciation of the desire for form, refers to such
forms as the stately and decorous shapes and features of men and women
including long eyebrows, red lips and white teeth, as well as things
universally regarded as precious, colors such as blue, yellow, red,
white, vermillion, purple, chartreuse and green, and all sorts of
marvelous forms which are able to influence the foolish person seeing
them to develop fondness for them and consequently embark on all manner
of unwholesome karmic deeds. One example is King Bimbasaara who, on
account of sexual desire, stole into a hostile kingdom and entered the
quarters of the courtesan Aamrapaalii. Another is the King Udayana who,
corrupted by lust, hacked off the hands and feet of five hundred
rishis.(22) [Desire for forms] is possessed of all manner of negative
consequences like this. Second, the renunciation of the desire for
sounds, refers to musical sounds such as issue from harps, zithers, or
flutes, and such as are created by strings, bamboo, metal or stone, and
refers also to such sounds as the voices of men and women singing,
chanting, hymning, or reciting. They may influence the foolish common
person who hears them to develop defiled attachment and then
consequently generate all manner of unwholesome karmic deeds. One
example of this phenomenon is the case of the five hundred rishis
dwelling in the Snowy Mountains who heard the singing of the
gandharva(23) maiden, lost dhyana absorption and thus experienced
intoxication, derangement and disturbance of mind. On account of all
sorts of reasons such as these one should realize the negative
consequences of [desire for] sounds. Third, the renunciation of the
desire for fragrances, refers to the physical scents of men and women,
the fragrances of society's food, drink and perfumes as well as all
manner of incenses and aromas. An ordinary fool does not understand the
[true] character of fragrances and thus on sensing them becomes fondly
attached and opens the door to the fetters.(24) An example of this is
the case of the bhikshu at the side of the lotus pond who smelled the
fragrance of the blossoms and whose thoughts were moved to fondness and
pleasure. The pond spirit then rebuked him soundly by scolding, "Why did
you steal my fragrance?!" One may, on account of becoming attached to
fragrances, stir to action otherwise quiescent fetters. For all manner
of reasons such as these one should realize the negative consequences of
[the desire for] fragrances. Fourth, the renunciation of the desire for
flavors, refers to bitterness, sourness, sweetness, pungency, saltiness,
mildness and other such fine flavors characteristic of fine beverages
and cuisine. They may be able to incite the foolish common person to
develop a kind of impure attachment and then consequently engage in
unwholesome karma. An example of this is the case of the shraama.nera
who developed an unhealthy obsession with the flavor of curds and who
thus, at the conclusion of his life, was reborn among curd worms. For
all manner of reasons such as these one should realize the negative
consequences of [the desire for] flavors. Fifth, the renunciation of the
desire for touchables, refers to the softness and delicate slickness of
the bodies of men and women, to the sensation of physical warmth when it
is cold, physical coolness when it is hot, as well as to all other
pleasant tactile contacts. The foolish person, lacking in wisdom, is
submerged by them and thus generates karma which blocks progress along
the Way. An example of this was the one-horned rishi who on account of
indulging the desire for physical contact lost the superknowledges and
ended up with a lustful woman riding him about, mounted atop his
shoulders. For all manner of reasons such as these, one should realize
the negative consequences of [the desire for] touchables. The dharma of
renouncing desire as treated above is drawn from the discussion in The
Mahayana Treatise. (25) It additionally states, "Alas! These beings!
They are constantly harassed by the five desires and yet they still
pursue them incessantly. "As for these five types of desire, when one
gains [their objects] they become progressively more intense, just as
when a fire is stoked with more firewood its flames burn ever brighter.
The five desires afford no [enduring] pleasure. [They go on and on] like
a dog's gnawing away at a withered old bone. The five desires
proliferate contention just as carrion occasions the skirmishing of
scavenging birds. The five desires scorch a person just as one is burned
carrying a torch into the wind. The five desires bring harm to a person
just as when one treads upon a poisonous snake. The five desires have
nothing real about them for they are like bounty gained in a dream.
[Satisfaction gained from] the five desires doesn't remain for long.
It's borrowed only for an instant and is like the gleam of a spark. A
wise man contemplates them as like an enemy or a thief. The worldly
person is foolish and deluded, is greedily attached to the five desires,
won't relinquish them even in the face of death, and later on undergoes
immeasurable suffering and aggravation [as a result]." This dharma of
the five desires is something [people] have in common with animals. All
beings act under the direction of the five desires and are slaves to the
desires. On account of these corrupting desires one may sink down into
the three [lower] paths [of rebirth]. [One should contemplate thus,] "If
now in cultivating dhyana I were to continue to be obstructed and
covered over by them, I would be acting like a great thief." One must
urgently distance oneself from [the five desires]. A pertinent treatment
of this topic is found in The Dhyana Sutra verse: That birth and death
are not cut off Is on account of desire and fondness for its flavor. As
when nursing a grudge until entering the tomb, One vainly endures all
manner of bitter suffering. The smell of the body is like that of a
corpse, Impurities stream forth from its nine apertures. Just as worms
in an outhouse delight in the feces, The foolish man's [pleasure in the]
body is no different. The one who is wise should contemplate the body,
And not lust after the tainted pleasures of the world. To be without
burdens and to have nothing desired, -- This is what's known as the true
nirvana. It's just as described by the Buddha himself: Practicing with
one mind and singular intention, While counting the breath in dhyana
absorption, -- This constitutes the dhuuta practice. [End of Chapter
Two] **End Notes** 22. A rishi is a recluse who devotes himself to
meditation. 23. A gandharva is a type of musical spirit attracted to
fine fragrances. 24. "Fetters" are just the afflictions of greed,
hatred, stupidity, arrogance, doubt, etc. which tie people up and bind
them to the world. 25. Chih-i refers to an abbreviated title of the
100-fascicle work by Nagarjuna more commonly known as The Treatise on
the Great Perfection of Wisdom (T25.1509). These quotations and
references all come from fascicle number seventeen.

### Chapter Three: Casting off the Coverings

[The Covering of Desires (in the Mind)](#1.1) [The Covering of
Anger](#2.1) [The Covering of Sleep](#3.1) [The Covering of Agitation
and Remorse](#4.1) [The Covering of Doubt](#5.1) As for the casting off
of the coverings brought up earlier, it refers to the five coverings.
The first involves the casting off of the covering of desire. Earlier we
discussed arisal of desire amidst the five external sense objects. Now
we are concerned with the arisal of desire in the sphere of the internal
mental faculty. This refers specifically to the situation where the
practitioner is seated upright cultivating dhyana and his mind generates
primary thoughts characterized by desire which become continuous with
one such thought following upon another in such away that they cover
over the wholesome mind and prevent it from developing. Having become
aware of this one should cast it off. Why should he do so? Just as in
the case of Shubhakara whose lustful mind arose internally, it is even
able to burn the body, how much the more so is the mind, when generating
the fire of desire, able to burn up all wholesome dharmas. Persons who
are possessed by desire are extremely far away from the Way. How is this
so? Desire is the dwelling place of all manner of afflictions and
disturbances. If the mind becomes attached and beset by desire, there is
no way for one to grow near to the Way. A relevant treatment of this
topic is found in "The Verse on Getting Rid of the Coverings": The
person with a sense of shame who's entered the Way Takes up his bowl and
provides merit for beings. How could one give free reign to desire for
sense objects And become immersed in the five senses? Having already
renounced the bliss of the five desires, One has cast them off and does
not look back. Why would one still desire to gain them Like a fool who
laps up his own vomit? All desires are suffering at the time they are
sought. When gained, one is usually fearful [of losing them]. On losing
them, one experiences intense aggravation. At every point there's
nowhere where pleasure abides. Given desires are subject to shortcomings
like this, How is one able to relinquish them? If one gains the bliss of
deep dhyana absorption, One is no longer deceived by [desire]. The
second is the casting off of the covering of anger. Anger is the basis
for losing the Buddha Dharma, a cause and condition for falling into the
wretched destinies,(26) the nemesis of Dharma bliss, the great thief
[which preys] on the wholesome mind, and the repository for all manner
of abusive speech. Accordingly, [it might occur that] when the
practitioner is sitting in dhyana meditation, he might think to himself,
"This fellow is now tormenting me. What's more, he torments my relations
and praises my adversaries." [Continuing], he might think, "It's been
like this in the past as well and it will continue to be the case in the
future. This amounts to a nine-fold torment." Consequently, he might
become angry and based upon that anger he might begin to cherish hatred.
On account of becoming hateful he might then think to torment the other
individual. In this fashion anger serves to cover over the mind and for
this reason it is referred to as a covering. One should proceed urgently
to cast it off and should not allow it to proliferate. Pertinent to this
topic is Shakra-devaanaam-indra's versified conundrum for the Buddha:
What is it that murders one's peacefulness and bliss? What is it that
murders freedom from worry? What is it that is the root of poisonousness
and Which swallows up and destroys every goodness? The Buddha responded,
speaking in verse: If one slays hatred one becomes peaceful and happy.
If one slays hatred one becomes free of worry. It's hatred that is the
root of poisonousness. It's hatred that destroys every goodness. After
one has become cognizant of this, one should cultivate compassion and
patience as a means to get rid of it and thereby allow the mind to
become pure. Third, casting off the covering of sleep. "Drowsiness" (the
first word in the Chinese compound for "sleep") refers to a dullness and
dimness of the subjective mental processes, whereas "slumber" (the
second word in the Chinese compound for "sleep") refers to the state in
which the five sense faculties are so obscured by this dimness that the
control of the limbs is relinquished and one curls up and sleeps
soundly. It is for this reason that it is referred to as the "covering"
of sleep. It is capable of destroying the mind intent on Dharma which
generates genuine bliss in this and later lives and is also capable of
destroying the bliss in later lives associated with rebirth in the
heavens and with the realization of nirvana. A dharma such as this which
is so possessed of ill effects is the very worst. How is this so? Unlike
the mental states associated with the other coverings which may be
gotten rid of through becoming aware of their presence, sleep is like
being dead in that there is no consciousness which abides in a state of
awareness. Because one is not in a state of wakefulness, it is difficult
to do away with it. A related citation is found in a verse employed by
buddhas and bodhisattvas in reprimanding somnolent disciples: Get up!
Don't lie there hugging that stinking corpse. It's but various
impurities falsely regarded as a "person." It's as if you've gotten a
serious disease or been shot by an arrow. With such an accumulation of
suffering's pains, how then can you sleep? You're like a man in shackles
being led to the gallows. With disastrous harm so imminent, how can you
sleep? The thieves of the fetters are not yet destroyed nor injury yet
averted. It's as if one were sharing a room with a venomous serpent.
It's also as if one were entering an army's gauntlet of swords. At such
a time as that, how could one sleep? Sleep is a vast darkness where one
can't see anything. Every day it deceives and steals a person's
brilliance. Because sleep covers over the mind, nothing whatever is
perceived. As it has such great drawbacks, how could one sleep? For all
manner of reasons such as these one remonstrates against the covering of
sleep. One becomes alarmed by and aware of impermanence, pares down ones
need for sleep and causes oneself to not be covered over by its
dullness. If the mind becomes severely afflicted with dullness and
sleep, one should resort to a dhyana wake-up device(27) or staff to get
rid of them. The fourth, casting off the covering of agitation and
remorsefulness. As for agitation itself, there are three types: The
first is physical agitation which is characterized by the body's
habitual enjoyment of wandering about endeavoring at all manner of
foolishness and by the inability to feel even momentarily peaceful when
sitting down. The second type is verbal agitation which is characterized
by the habitual enjoyment of singing, chanting, disputation over rights
and wrongs, useless and frivolous discourse, the discussion of worldly
matters, and so forth. The third type is mental agitation where one's
mental inclination is towards neglectfulness, towards giving the mind
free rein in the manipulation of situations, and where one muses over
literature, the arts, worldly talents and artisanship and where one
indulges in all manner of unwholesome initial and discursive thought.
Agitation's function as a dharma is to destroy the mind of the monastic.
Even if a person is focused in his thoughts he might still be unable to
develop meditative absorption, how much the less if he is agitated and
scattered. A person who is agitated and scattered is like a drunken
elephant unrestrained by the trainer's hook and like a camel without a
nose ring. None of these are subject to control or discipline. An
appropriate verse states: You've already shaved your head and donned the
dyed robe. Taking up the clay bowl you go out on the alms round. How
then can you delight in and be attached to dharmas of frivolity and
agitation? Being neglectful and giving rein to your inclinations, you
lose the benefits of Dharma. Having lost the benefits of the Dharma in
addition to having sacrificed the pleasures of the world one should,
after realizing one's errors, urgently cast off [agitation]. As for
remorsefulness, it is remorsefulness which brings about the creation of
a covering. If one experiences agitation in which there is no
remorsefulness, this does not constitute a covering. Why not? Because at
such a time of agitation, it (remorsefulness) has not yet become one of
the associated conditions. But later, when one is desirous of entering
meditative absorption, one then may experience remorsefulness over what
one has done, whereupon worry and affliction cover over the mind. It is
for this reason that it is referred to as a covering. Remorsefulness
itself is of two types. The first is remorsefulness which arises as a
consequence of agitation as alluded to above. The second is exemplified
by the person who has committed a monstrous and severe offense and who
thus constantly experiences feelings of fearfulness. The arrow of
remorsefulness has entered his mind and has become stuck so firmly that
it can not be pulled out. A pertinent verse states: Through having done
what one shouldn't have done, Or through having failed to do what one
should have done, One is burned by the fire of the affliction of
remorse, And in a later life falls into the wretched destinies. If a
person is able to feel remorse for an offense, Then having experienced
remorse, he should not continue to feel troubled. In this way the mind
can be peaceful and happy. One should not constantly seize upon it
through recollection. If one possesses either of the two kinds of
remorse, Whether it be over having failed to do what one should have
done, Or over having done what one should not have done, This is the
mark of a stupid person. It is not the case that on account of being
remorseful One will somehow be able to do what one failed to do. All of
the ill deeds which one has already committed Can't be caused thereby to
be undone. Fifth, casting off the covering of doubt. Because doubt
covers over the mind, one is unable to develop faith in any dharma.
Because one has no mind of faith, one encounters the Buddha's Dharma in
vain and gains nothing whatsoever from it. This is analogous to a man's
entering into a mountain of jewels. If he has no hands he is unable to
acquire anything at all. Thus the faults of doubt are extremely
numerous. What needn't obstruct the development of meditative absorption
now in fact becomes the primary obstruction to gaining meditative
absorption. There are three types of doubt. The first is where one
doubts oneself and thus thinks to himself, "My faculties are all dim and
dull. The defilement from my previous offenses is deep and severe. Could
it be that I'm not the man for this?" If one allows oneself to
manufacture doubts such as these then the dharma of meditative
absorption will never be able to manifest. If one desires to cultivate
meditative absorption, one must not slight oneself, for it is difficult
to fathom the extent of one's roots of goodness planted in former
lifetimes. The second type of doubt is that wherein one doubts one's own
guru, [thinking to oneself,] "If his deportment and appearance are such
as this he must not have any [realization of the] Way himself. How then
could he be able to teach me." If one develops such doubting arrogance
then it constitutes an obstruction to meditative absorption. A dharma
appropriate to one wishing to be rid of it is exemplified by a passage
from The Mahayana Treatise wherein it states that this is just as when
there is gold [dust] contained in a smelly leather pouch. Because one is
desirous of obtaining the gold one can't just pitch out the smelly
pouch. The practitioner's situation may be just like this. Although the
guru may not be immaculate, still, one should look upon him as one would
the Buddha. The third type of doubt is that wherein one doubts the
Dharma. Worldly people are usually attached to their own ideas and thus
are not able to immediately believe the Dharma which they have received
[nor are they able to readily] accept it and cultivate it with a
respectful mind. If the mind becomes hesitant, then even though one has
immediate exposure to the Dharma, it makes no imprint on the mind. Why
not? The significance of the obstruction of doubtfulness is exemplified
by a verse which states: It's just as when a person stands at a fork in
the road And is so deluded by doubt that he goes nowhere at all. With
respect to the reality mark of all dharmas, Doubt functions just like
this. Because one has doubts one doesn't search industriously For the
reality mark of all dharmas. Views and doubts arise from delusion. Among
the ills they are the worst. Among all the good and unwholesome dharmas
Throughout the spheres of birth-and-death and nirvana Dhyana absorption
is an actual and truly existent dharma. Don't develop doubts about it.
If you cherish the delusion of doubt, The hell messenger from the King
of Death will tie you up Like a lion pouncing on a deer And you'll be
unable to gain liberation. Although dwelling in the world one may have
doubts, One should happily accord with wholesome dharmas, Just as when
one contemplates a fork in the road One should follow the one offering
the best benefits. With respect to the Dharma of the Buddha, faith
constitutes the means whereby one can enter. If one has no faith, then
although he is in the presence of the Buddha's Dharma, one will finally
gain nothing whatsoever. For all manner of reasons such as these,
realizing the faults of doubtfulness, one should urgently cast it off.
Question: Unwholesome dharmas are vast in number and the "dusts" [of the
sense objects] are immeasurably numerous. Why is it that one must only
get rid of five dharmas? Reply: These five coverings basically comprise
four dharmas, namely the three poisons and "equal-distribution" [among
each of the three poisons.] These in turn subsume all 84,000 access
points to weariness with sense objects. Firstly, the covering of desire
is just the poison of desire. Secondly, the covering of anger, is just
the poison of anger. Thirdly, the two dharmas of sleep and doubt are
just the poison of stupidity. The fourth is agitation-associated
remorsefulness It is equally present [in each of the three poisons].
Together, these constitute the four categories of afflictions. In each
of them there are 21,000. In all four of them there are collectively a
total of 84,000. Hence when one gets rid of these five coverings it is
just the elimination of all unwholesome dharmas. For all manner of
reasons such as these the practitioner casts off the five coverings.
Like a person who has gained freedom from a great burden or one who has
been cured of a serious disease, like a starving man arriving in a
prosperous country or like one who has been rescued safe and unharmed,
from a band of villains--The practitioner is just like these. When he
eliminates these five coverings his mind is calm and secure and he feels
clear, cool and blissful. Just as with the sun and moon which may be
obscured by five phenomena: smoke, dust, clouds, fog and the hand of
Raahu the asura, such that they are unable to shine brightly,--so too it
is with a person's mind and the five coverings. [End of Chapter Three]
**End Notes** 26. The (three) wretched destinies are rebirth in the
hells, as a hungry ghost, and as an animal. 27. The "dhyana wake-up
device" refers to a piece of wood connected by a string to the earlobes
which falls and tugs at them when the meditator's posture starts to
droop as a result of sleepiness.

### Chapter Four: Making Adjustments

[Adjustments with Regard to Eating](#1.4) [Adjustments with Regard to
Sleep](#2.4) [Adjustments with Regard to the Body](#3.4) [Adjustments
with Regard to the Breath](#4.4) [Adjustments with Regard to the
Mind](#5.4) Now when the practitioner first takes up the study of
sitting in dhyana, as one who is desirous of cultivating the Dharma of
the Buddhas of the ten directions and the three periods of time, he
should first make the great vows to bring all beings to liberation. In
vowing to pursue the unsurpassed way of the Buddhas [he makes] his mind
as solid as vajra and [resolves to be] industrious and courageous to the
point that he will not even spare his own life and will never turn back
in his quest to perfect all the dharmas of the Buddha. Next, seated in
meditation and employing right mindfulness, he deliberates upon the true
and actual mark of all dharmas, including the so-called wholesome,
unwholesome and neutral dharmas, including the internal and external
sense faculties, sense objects, the false consciousnesses and all of the
dharmas associated with outflows and afflictions, and including also the
conditioned dharmas throughout the three realms which are associated
with birth and death and with cause and effect, [and in reflecting upon
them perceives them] as existing solely on account of the mind.
Accordingly, The Sutra on the Ten Grounds states, "Throughout the three
realms nothing else whatsoever exists. It is all created solely by the
one mind." If one realizes that mind is devoid of [an
inherently-existent] nature then [one realizes that] all dharmas are not
actual. If the mind has no defiled attachment then all of the karmic
activity in the sphere of birth and death comes to a halt. After one has
carried out this contemplation he should then take up the cultivation
according to the proper sequence. What is meant by "making adjustments?"
Now, to draw upon familiar subjects as analogies for this dharma, it is
just as when a common potter wishes to create various sorts of vessels.
He must first skillfully make adjustments in the clay such that it is
neither too stiff nor too soft. Afterwards he is able to move to the
potter's wheel. It's also like playing the lute. One should first make
adjustments to the strings, properly setting their the tension. Then one
may proceed to play, producing all sorts of marvelous melodies. When the
practitioner cultivates the mind it is just the same . One must make
skillful adjustments in five different matters and must make those
adjustments appropriately. Then samadhi will develop easily. If there is
some area which has not been properly adjusted, then there will be all
sorts of obstructive difficulties and one's roots of goodness will come
forth only with difficulty. First, making adjustments with respect to
food. Now as for food's function as a dharma, it is originally consumed
out of a desire to supply the body so that one may advance along the
Way. If one eats to the point of becoming too full, then the breathing
will be strained, the central region will feel stuffed, the energetic
channels will not flow freely, the mental faculties will be blocked up,
and, when sitting, one's thoughts will not be tranquil. If one eats too
little the body will waste away, the mind will be too tightly strung,
and mental deliberation will be unstable. Neither of these two
[extremes] constitute the way to the realization of meditative
absorption. If one consumes contaminated food, then it will cause a
person's mind consciousness to become dull and confused. If one consumes
foods which are not appropriate, then it will stimulate all sorts of
disorders to arise and will cause the four great elements to be thrown
far out of balance. This is the beginning phase of one's cultivation of
meditative absorption and so one must be extremely careful in the way
one proceeds. Accordingly, a sutra states, "If the body is tranquil then
one's progress along the Way will flourish. Knowing the proper measure
with respect to eating, being ever blissful in a remote abode, and
maintaining a pure mind while taking pleasure in diligent effort,--This
is the teaching of all Buddhas." Second, adjustments with regard to
sleep. Now sleep is a matter of being covered over by a state of
ignorance and delusion. One must not give free reign to it. If one
sleeps too much, one not only wastes the opportunity to cultivate the
dharma of the Superiors, but one also destroys any meditative skill
[which may have developed] so that one may potentially cause the mind to
be cloaked in darkness and the roots of goodness to become entirely
submerged. One should awaken to and realize [the significance of]
impermanence, regulate and subdue sleep, cause one's spiritual energy to
be clear and white and one's mindful thought to be bright and pure. In
this way one will establish one's mind in the mental state of the
Superiors and cause samadhi to manifest before one. Accordingly, a sutra
states, "Whether in the beginning or end of the night, there must be no
wasting [of the opportunity to cultivate. One must not, on account of
sleep, cause a lifetime to pass by emptily with nothing whatsoever
achieved. One should be mindful that the fire of impermanence burns up
the entire world and thus one should seek early on to bring about one's
own deliverance. One must not [indulge in] sleep. Third, adjustments
with regard to the body. Fourth, adjustments with regard to the breath.
Fifth, adjustments with regard to the mind. These three ought to be
employed together. They cannot be discussed separately. There is only
the matter of their having a first, a middle and a last. In this sense
the technique is not the same. This being the case, there are
differences then in their features when entering into, abiding in, and
coming out of [a session]. Now, as for the physical adjustments to be
undertaken when one first desires to enter dhyana: There are issues of
appropriateness in the physical adjustments to be undertaken by the
cultivator who wishes to enter into samadhi. For instance, when one is
abiding outside of meditative absorption, whether walking, standing,
commencing an activity or stopping one, whether one is moving or is
still, in whatsoever endeavor one is carrying on-- In every case it is
essential to be meticulously attentive. If one's actions are
characterized by coarseness and impetuousness then one's breath will be
correspondingly coarse. Because the breath is coarse, then the thoughts
will be scattered and difficult to register clearly. Additionally, when
one returns to sitting, he will be agitated and muddled and the mind
will not be tranquil or contented. Even though one's body is not abiding
in a state of meditative absorption, still, it is essential to employ
one's mind to counteractively implement skillful means. Later, when one
enters into dhyana [meditation session], it is essential to take care in
setting up the body in its proper place. When one first arrives at the
sitting cushion, one must first establish oneself in the sitting
location in such a manner that all is peaceful and secure and so that
nothing will interfere with one's remaining for a long time. Next one
should arrange the feet correctly. If one is sitting in the half-lotus
posture, then one places the left foot so that it is on top of the right
foot and then pulls it in so that it is close to the body proper so that
the toes of the left foot are aligned with the right thigh while the
toes of the right foot are aligned with the left thigh. If one wishes to
sit in full lotus then one [next] brings the right foot up so that it
rests above the left. Next one loosens the belt on one's robe, making
sure that it is straight all around and cannot fall open while one is
sitting. Next one should arrange the hands, lays the open left hand on
top of the right hand so that they fit together and then one rests them
atop the left foot [in the case of half lotus] and draws them in toward
the body so that they are proximate to the center of the body. Next, one
should properly arrange the body, first making sure that the body is
erect and then seeing that all of the limbs are symetrically arranged,
doing this as many as seven or eight times like a type of massaging
method. One must not allow the hands or feet to slip out of correct
posture. After one has done this then one sits up perfect straight
insuring that the spine is neither slumping nor pushed forward. Next one
should straighten up the neck and head so that the nose and the navel
are lined up and so that the head is not tilted to the side, held at an
angle, drooped downward or raised upward. One faces forward and remains
straight. Next, one should expel the turbid breath. The method for
expelling the breath requires that one open the mouth and release the
breath while not allowing this process to be either coarse or urgent.
One should make it soft and smooth as one releases the breath and sends
it forth. One should imagine that throughout the body any blockages
within the numerous energetic pathways are moved on out as one exhales.
Then, one closes the mouth and inhales pure breath through the nose. One
should do this up to three times. If the physical respiration is already
correctly adjusted then only once is adequate. Next, one should close
the mouth such that the lips and teach are held together while the
tongue is held back up against the hard palate. Then one should close
the eyes only enough that they block off the light from outside. One
should straighten up the body and sit upright like a stela. One cannot
allow the body, the head or the four limbs to move about even slightly.
This constitutes the technique for making physical adjustments as one
first proceeds to enter dhyana absorption. To speak of what is most
essential, being neither too loose nor too tight constitutes the mark of
correct physical adjustment. Fourth, the technique for making
adjustments in the breath when first entering dhyana [meditation]. There
are four types of characteristics: first, windy breathing; second,
uneven breathing; third, normal breathing; and fourth, subtle
respiration. The first three are indications of inadequate adjustment
whereas the last one is characteristic of correct adjustment. What is
meant by "windy" breathing? When one is sitting and one senses the
presence of a sound as the breath comes into and goes forth from the
nose this is "windy" breathing. What is meant by "uneven" breathing?
When one is sitting and even though the breath makes no sound there is
still a catching and stopping such that it does not move on through,
this is "uneven" breathing. What is meant by "normal" breathing? When
one is sitting and even though the breath makes no sound and even though
there is no catching and stopping, still, it is not subtle, this is
"normal" breathing. What is meant by "subtle" respiration? There is no
sound, no catching, and no coarseness. The going forth and coming in of
the breath is smooth and drawn out such that it is as if still there and
yet as it has disappeared. It supports the spirit becoming peaceful and
stable. One feels pleased and content. These are the marks of subtle
respiration. If one maintains windy breathing, then one becomes
scattered. If one maintains uneven breathing, then one becomes stuck. If
one maintains normal breathing, then one becomes weary. If one maintains
subtle respiration, then one enters meditative absorption. If when one
is sitting there exist the three characteristics of windy breathing,
uneven breathing, and normal breathing, these constitute inadequate
adjustment. In a case where one applies mental effort under these
circumstances they also become [causes of] mental disorder and make it
difficult for the mind to enter meditative absorption. If one wishes to
correct them, then one should rely on three techniques: First, stabilize
the mind by anchoring it below; second, relax and release the body; and
third, visualize the breath penetrating through to all of the pores,
going forth and coming in without any obstructions whatsoever. If one
makes one's mind subtle, one causes the breath to become very fine. If
the breath becomes regulated, then the manifold disorders do not arise.
One's mind easily enters meditative absorption. This constitutes the
practitioner's technique for regulating the breath when first entering
meditative absorption. To speak of the essentials, it is neither coarse
nor tending to slip away. This is the mark of breathing which has been
regulated. Fifth, regulating the mind when one first enters meditative
absorption involves three topics: first, entering; second, abiding; and
third, coming out. The first, entering, consists of two topics. The
first is the regulation and control of chaotic thinking so that [one's
thoughts] are not allowed to run off. As for the second, one must cause
situations involving "sinking," "floating," "laxity" and "urgency" to
[return to] their proper place. What constitutes the mark of "sinking"?
If when one is sitting one's [mental state] is murky and dim, if one
doesn't remember anything or if one's head tends to droop downward,
these constitute marks of "sinking." At such a time one should anchor
one mindfulness at the tip of the nose and thus compel one's mind to
abide in the midst of objective conditions so that there will be no
breaking up and scattering of the mental focus. This technique is able
to counter "sinking." What constitutes the mark of "floating"? If while
one is sitting the mind prefers to drift off and move about, if the body
too is ill at ease, or if one brings to mind various external objective
conditions these constitute marks of "floating." At such a time it is
appropriate to stabilize the mind by directing it downwards and
anchoring it at the objective condition constituted by the navel. When
one controls all discursive thoughts the mind immediately becomes stable
and abides. In such a case one's mind is easily established in
stillness. To speak of the essentials, being neither sinking nor
floating constitutes the mark of the regulated mind. The meditating mind
may also possess marks of laxity or urgency. As for the marks of the
meditating mind afflicted with the "urgency" malady, they arise from a
situation where one has focused the mind and brought mindfulness to
bear. Because of this one has entered a meditative absorption through
which [one's attention] has moved upward and brought about intense pain
in the chest. One should relax and release his mind and visualize the
breath all flowing downward. If one were to do this then the calamity
would naturally be cured. As for the marks of mind afflicted with the
"laxity" malady, the determination on the part of the mind of awareness
is scattered and dilatory. The body prefers to be slack and slumped.
Perhaps saliva flows forth from the mouth. At times one is dull and
unclear. At such a time one should draw up the body and make one's
mindfulness more urgent. One should compel the mind to abide in the
midst of objective conditions and the body to hold itself in position.
One uses this technique as the antidote. The mind may possess the
characteristics of being either rough or slippery. If one infers from
this [the appropriate correctives] are obvious. These constitute the
techniques for regulating the mind when one first enters meditative
absorption. Now, entering meditative absorption is fundamentally a
process wherein one proceeds from the coarse to enter the subtle. In
this matter it is the body which constitutes that which is coarse. The
breath abodes within it. The mind is the most subtle and still. One
causes the mind to become established in stillness. This then is the
initial skillful means for entering meditative absorption. This
constitutes the regulation of the two matters which takes place when one
first enters meditative absorption. As for the regulation of the three
matters which takes place as one abides in the sitting posture, the
practitioner should utilize his mind in the focusing of mindfulness
whether the given session of sitting meditation is long or short and
whether it extends for one, two, or three of the twelve [two-hour]
periods in a day. One must clearly recognize the characteristics which
indicate whether or not the three phenomena of body, breath and mind are
in a state of correct adjustment. As one continues with a given instance
of sitting, if even though one has already finished making adjustments
to the body it nonetheless occurs that his body becomes perhaps lax,
perhaps tight, perhaps tilted, perhaps crooked, perhaps drooped, or
perhaps arched upward, after one becomes aware of it one must then
correct it. One must ensure that one is peaceful and stable, that one is
free of any laxity and urgency, and that one is abiding in a posture
which is level, straight and upright. Then again, during a single
session of sitting although the body may be correctly adjusted, still,
the breath may not be in harmony. The marks of its not being regulated
are as discussed above. Perhaps there is "windy" breathing. Perhaps
there is "uneven" breathing. Or perhaps in addition the breathing has
become urgent such that there is a sense of within the body of
distension and fullness. In such cases one should employ the previously
discussed methods and thus counter them accordingly. In every case one
should cause [the movement of] the respiration along its pathways to
become soft and smooth so that it seems as if it is present and yet it
is as if it is absent. Again, it may be that in the course of single
session of sitting, although the body and the breath are correctly
regulated, still, the mind may have failed to achieve meditative
absorption on account of being either "floating," "sinking," "lax," or
"urgent." At such a time, when one becomes aware of it one should employ
the previously mentioned techniques to cause it through regulation to
abide appropriately in the median range. These three matters most
definitely do not have any fixed sequence of implementation. One accords
with whatever aspect is out of adjustment in proceeding to establish
appropriate adjustment of it so that throughout the course of a single
session of sitting the three factors of the body, the respiration, and
the mind abide in a state of appropriate regulation. They remain free of
any mutual violation and thus they become fused to the point that there
is no duality among them. When this is the case, one is then able to get
rid of any residual disorders rooted in previous existences, one is able
to guard against and prevent the arisal of all obstacles, and one is
able to establish ascendancy in the path of meditative absorption. As
for the regulation of the three factors at the time of coming out [of
meditative absorption], if it is the case that the practitioner's
specific session of sitting in dhyana is about to come to an end, when
he desires to come out of meditative absorption, he should first release
his mind onto a different objective condition, and then open his mouth
and release the breath while also visualizing it dispersing itself from
within its many energetic pathways so that it follows along with the
mental attention. Afterwards, one should move the body ever so slightly
and then move the shoulders and then the hands, the head, and the neck.
Next, one moves the two feet and allows them to become entirely limber
again. Next, one uses the hands to massage over all of his pores and
then massages his hands so that they are caused to become warm. He then
uses them to cover his two eyes and afterwards then opens them. Once one
has waited for the body to warm up a little one can then come and go as
he pleases. If one fails to do this, since one may have succeeded in
causing the mind to dwell [in a particular way] during the sit, if one
then acts in a sudden and hurried fashion as one comes out [of
meditation], then the subtle factors may not have yet been allowed to
disperse. If they thus continue to abide [trapped] within the body, they
may cause a person to have headaches and to experience stiffness of all
of the joints similar to rheumatism. In subsequent sitting sessions one
may become afflicted, agitated and ill at ease. Therefore when the mind
wishes to emerge from meditative absorption one must always pay careful
attention [to these points]. This constitutes the technique for
regulating the body, respiration and mind as one emerges from meditative
absorption. Because one moves forth from the subtle on into that which
is coarse this involves a skillful entering abiding and emerging as
described in a verse: In moving forward and in stopping there is a
[proper] sequence [So that] the coarse and the subtle do not work
against each other. It is just as with [the responses of] a well-tamed
horse When one desires to halt and then desires to move on. In The Lotus
Sutra, it says: "For the sake of the Buddha Way, the bodhisattvas in
this great assembly have already diligently practiced vigor for an
incalculable number of tens of millions of ko.tiis(28) of kalpas. They
have become skillful in entering, abiding in, and emerging from an
incalculable number of trillions of ko.tiis of samadhis. They have
gained great superknowledges, have long cultivated the brahman conduct
and have become well able to practice in appropriate sequence all of the
good dharmas. [End of Chapter Four]

### Chapter Five: Practicing in accord with Skillful Means

Now, as for cultivating stopping and contemplation, it is necessary to
employ accesses to Dharma characterized by skillful means. [In this
connection] there are five dharmas. The first is zeal. One possesses the
zeal to separate from all of the world's erroneous thinking and inverted
views because one nurtures the zeal to achieve success in all of the
Dharma accesses associated with dhyana and wisdom. This may also be
referred to by [such terms as] "being determined to," "aspiring to,"
"having a fondness for," and "taking pleasure in." This is because this
person is determined towards, aspires to, is fond of, and takes pleasure
in all of the profound accesses to Dharma. Hence this is known as
"zeal." This is as stated by the Buddha when he said, "Zeal constitutes
the origin of all good dharmas." The second is vigor. In solidly
upholding the precepts and getting rid of the five coverings one is
focused, intensely energetic, and unremitting in both the early and
later watches of the night. This is analogous to when one employs a
drill to make fire but it has not yet gotten hot. Even to the very end
one does not rest. This refers to being vigorous in the good dharmas of
the Way. The third is mindfulness. One remains mindful that the world is
deceptive and may be deemed base whereas dhyana absorption is honorable
and may be deemed noble. If one achieves dhyana absorption, one is
immediately able to perfectly generate non-outflow wisdom and the power
of the Way which comes with all of the superknowledges. One realizes the
equal and right enlightenment and extensively engages in delivering
beings to liberation. This may be deemed noble. Hence we refer here to
mindfulness. The fourth is discerning wisdom. One takes the measure of
worldly bliss as opposed to the bliss associated with dhyana absorption
and wisdom, judging the successes versus the failures and the valueless
versus the valuable. Why? As for the bliss of the world, the bliss is
but little whereas the suffering is much. It is false, deceptive and
unreal. This amounts to a failure and is valueless. As for the bliss
which accompanies dhyana absorption and wisdom, it is devoid of
outflows, unconditioned, characterized by stillness, leisure and
liberation. One leaves birth and death behind forever and is always
separate from suffering. This constitutes a success and is a thing which
is valuable. Because one engages in such an analysis we speak here of
discerning wisdom. The fifth is single-mindedness in making clear
distinctions. One sees clearly that the world may be deemed disastrous
and horrible. One recognizes well that the meritorious qualities of
meditative absorption and wisdom may be deemed honorable and noble. At
such a time one should make a single-minded decision to cultivate
stopping and contemplation, making one's mind like vajra so that the
heavenly demons and the non-buddhists will be unable to impose
obstruction or destruction. [One's determination should be such that]
even if one's efforts came up empty and nothing whatsoever was gained
one will still perservere to the end and not turn back or change [one's
resolve]. This is what is meant by single-mindedness. This is analogous
to a person's travels. It is first necessary to know the signs of the
open or obstructed road. Afterwards one decides to proceed
single-mindedly along the road and then advances accordingly. Hence we
speak here of discerning wisdom and single-mindedness. One of the Sutras
states, "Were it not for wisdom, one would not develop dhyana
absorption. Were it not for dhyana absorption, one would not develop
wisdom." The principle abides right here. [End of Chapter Five]

### Chapter Six: The Actual Cultivation

As for the cultivation of stopping and contemplation, there are two
modes. The first is cultivation while sitting. The second is cultivation
while moving through objective conditions and as one relates to the
objective sphere. As for the first [mode], the cultivation as one
cultivates stopping and contemplation while sitting, although it is true
that this can be accomplished in any of the four deportments,(1) still,
for the study of the Way, sitting is the superior posture. Therefore one
first explains stopping and contemplation in relation to sitting.
Generally speaking, one sets forth five different concepts in this
connection: 1) Cultivating stopping and contemplation as means of
countering the coarseness and chaos of the beginner's mind; 2)
Cultivating stopping and contemplation as means of countering the
disorders of mental "sinking," or "floating;" 3) Cultivating stopping
and contemplation in a manner which accords with whatever is
appropriate; 4) Cultivating stopping and contemplation to counteract
subtle states of mind occurring in meditative absorption; 5) Cultivating
stopping and contemplation as means of achieving equal balance in
meditative absorption and wisdom.] The first [concept] is cultivating
stopping and contemplation as means of countering the coarseness and
chaos of the beginner's mind. This refers to the case where, because the
practitioner's thoughts are coarse and disordered when he first attempts
to sit in dhyana, he should cultivate stopping to get rid of and
demolish them. If one is unable to break their hold through stopping,
then one ought to cultivate contemplation in such a case. Hence one
speaks of cultivating stopping and contemplation in order to counter and
break the coarseness and chaos of the beginner's mind. Now, the
explanation of the cultivation of stopping and contemplation involves
two concepts. The first, the cultivation of stopping, is itself
comprised of three types: The first of these is stopping wherein one
maintains the [mental] state through anchoring [one's attention] on an
objective condition. This refers to anchoring the mind at such locations
as the tip of the nose or the navel in order to prevent the mind from
becoming scattered. Accordingly, a sutra states, "One anchors the mind
and refrains from falling into neglectfulness. This is just like locking
up a monkey." The second is stopping through controlling the mind. This
refers to exerting control no matter what comes up in the mind in order
to prevent it from running off and becoming scattered. A sutra says, "As
for these five [sense] faculties, the mind acts as their ruler.
Therefore, you should all skillfully control your minds." Because these
two are both characterized by [obvious] phenomena it is unnecessary to
analyze them [further here]. The third is stopping through realization
of truth. The means that, no matter what the mind dwells upon, if one
understands that all dharmas are produced from causes and conditions and
are devoid of an inherently-existent nature, then the mind will not
seize upon them. If the mind does not seize upon them then the mind
characterized by false thoughts will cease. Hence this constitutes
stopping. This is as described in a sutra where it states: Within each
and every one of all the dharmas Causes and conditions are empty, devoid
of a ruler. Put the mind to rest; penetrate to the original source.
Based on this one is referred to as a "shrama.na." When the practitioner
first sits in dhyana, [he should realize that] no matter what the mind
thinks of , no dharma abides for even an instant. If one's false
thoughts do not cease even though one has implemented the
above-described technique of stopping through realization of truth, one
should reflect upon the thoughts which arise, and realize that, as for
the past, they have already been destroyed, as for the present, they do
not abide, and as for the future, they have not yet come. When one
searches throughout these three regions they cannot be found at all. If
they constitute a dharma which cannot be found then there is no thought.
If there is no thought, then all dharmas are entirely nonexistent.
Although the practitioner contemplates and finds that thoughts do not
abide and are entirely nonexistent, still, it is not the case that there
is not a single k.sa.na in which there is carried out the arisal of
aware and knowing mindfulness. One additionally contemplates this mind's
thought, [observing that] it is on account of the internal presence of
the six [sense] faculties, the external presence of the six [sense]
objects, and the mutual opposition between the faculties and the objects
that consciousness therefore arises. When the faculties and the objects
have not yet been placed in mutual opposition, the production of
consciousness is fundamentally nonexistent. One contemplates production
in this manner and also contemplates extinction in the same way. The
names "production" and "extinction" are only falsely established. When
the mind which is characterized by production and extinction is
extinguished, then still extinction manifests before one and there is
nothing whatsoever which can be found. This is the so-called empty and
still noumenal principle of nirvana. [Having carried out this
contemplation], one's mind naturally comes to a halt. The Treatise on
the Awakening of Faith states, "If the mind has run off and become
scattered one should immediately draw it back in and establish it in
right mindfulness. As for this "right mindfulness," one should be aware
that it is only mind. There is no external realm. This very mind itself
is devoid of any inherently existent characteristic. There is no instant
in which it can be gotten at. It is reported that there are beginners in
the cultivation of this study who, not yet having developed an easy
ability to achieve a stillness of the mind, suppress it so as to force
it to remain still, and so often become crazy [as a result]. This is
just like studying archery. If one devotes a long time to the practice
one then succeeds in hitting the target. The second, the cultivation of
contemplation, is of two types. The first is counteractive
contemplation. It is exemplified by the contemplation of impurity which
counteracts desire, the contemplation involving the mind of
loving-kindness which counteracts hatred, the contemplation involving
analysis of the sense realms which counteracts attachment to a self, and
the breath-counting contemplation which counteracts excessive discursive
thinking. These will not be discussed in detail here. The second, right
contemplation, involves contemplating all dharmas as being devoid of
marks and also as produced from causes and conditions. The absence of an
[inherently-existent] nature in causes and conditions is just the
reality mark. If one first comprehends that absolutely everything in the
realm which is contemplated is entirely empty then the mind which is
able to engage in the contemplation spontaneously refrains from arising.
The earlier and later parts of the text primarily discuss this
principle. The reader is requested to study this in detail himself. This
is as exemplified in a sutra verse where it states: All dharmas are
insubstantial. They constantly abide in thought. One who's already
understood and perceived emptiness In every case is free of thinking.
The second [concept] involves cultivating stopping and contemplation as
means of countering the disorders of mental "sinking," or "floating."
When the practitioner is sitting in dhyana if his mind is obstructed by
dimness and fails to attend to anything as he stares blankly, or if one
sometimes sleeps a lot, at that time one should cultivate contemplation
as a means of bringing forth complete illumination. If in the midst of
sitting one's mind moves about in a floating manner such that it is
light, agitated, and ill at ease, at that time one should cultivate
stopping in order to bring it to a halt. This is a summary explanation
of the features of cultivating stopping and contemplation as means of
countering the disorders of mental "sinking," or "floating." It is only
necessary that in utilizing them one knows well how to match the
medicine and the disorder. In every case one must not commit the error
of applying the antidotes in a contrary or unorthodox manner. The third
[concept] involves cultivating stopping and contemplation in a manner
which accords with whatever is appropriate. When the practitioner is
sitting in dhyana, if even though he does cultivate contemplative
illumination for the sake of counteracting mental sinking, his mind
still does not become bright and pure and there is no Dharmic benefit
from it, he should then try cultivating stopping in order to arrest it.
If when he is utilizing stopping he then becomes aware of his body and
mind having become peaceful and still, one should know that it is
appropriate to utilize stopping. One should then employ stopping to
pacify the mind. When one is sitting in dhyana, if even though one
cultivates stopping to counteract mental floating and moving about, the
mind still does not come to a stop and one derives no Dharmic benefit
from it, one should then try cultivating contemplation. If in the midst
of contemplation one then becomes aware that the mind and spirit have
become bright, pure, still and stable, one ought to know that it is
appropriate to engage in contemplation. One should then employ
contemplation to pacify the mind. This is a summary explanation of the
features of cultivating stopping and contemplation in a manner which
accords with whatever is appropriate. It is only necessary that one
skillfully adapt to what is appropriate and cultivate that. If one does
this, then the mind and spirit will become peaceful and stable, the
calamity of the afflictions will be put to rest and one will realize
success in the entryways to Dharma. The fourth [concept] involves
cultivating stopping and contemplation to counteract subtle states of
mind occurring in meditative absorption. This refers to the situation
where the practitioner has first utilized stopping and contemplation to
counteract and demolish coarseness and disordered [thought] and, since
the disordered thought has already ceased, he then succeeds in entering
meditative absorption. On account of the subtle mind state occurring in
meditative absorption one becomes aware of the body as empty and still
and then experiences bliss. It may be that a mind prone to indulgence is
then brought forth which is able to use that subtle mental state as a
basis for seizing on a deviant principle. If one is unaware of the false
and deceptive nature of the mind which has come to a rest in meditative
absorption, one will certainly become desirously attached [to this
experience]. If one becomes desirously attached one will cling to this
as being genuine. If [however] one is aware that this is false,
deceptive, and not genuine, then the two afflictions of affection and
views will not arise. This constitutes the cultivation of stopping. If
even though one continues to cultivate stopping, the mind still remains
attached and the karma of the fetters linked to affection and views does
not cease, one should then cultivate contemplation, directing one's
contemplation to the subtle mind associated with meditative absorption.
If one does not [in fact] perceive [the actual existence of] the subtle
mind occurring in meditative absorption, then one will not maintain
attachment to the views linked to meditative absorption. If one does not
establish attachment to views linked to meditative absorption then the
karma associated with the afflictions of affection and views will all be
entirely shattered and destroyed. This constitutes the cultivation of
contemplation. This is a summary explanation of the features of
cultivating stopping and contemplation to counteract the subtle mental
states occurring in meditative absorption. The distinctions associated
with the methods of stopping and contemplation are identical to those
set forth previously. The only difference here is that they are employed
to demolish extremely subtle errors inherent in [certain] views linked
to meditative absorption. The fifth [concept] is the cultivation of
stopping and contemplation as means of achieving equal balance in
meditative absorption and wisdom. While sitting in dhyana, either on
account of cultivating stopping or perhaps on account of cultivating
contemplation, the practitioner then enters dhyana absorption. If
although one has succeeded in entering meditative absorption, one still
has no contemplative wisdom, this constitutes an absorption
characterized by stupidity whereby one is unable to cut off the fetters.
Or it may be that the operative contemplative wisdom is only faint and
scant. In such a case one is unable to generate true wisdom, sever the
fetters, or develop the entryways to Dharma. At such a time one should
cultivate contemplative analysis. If one does so then meditative
absorption and wisdom become equally balanced, one becomes able to sever
the fetters, and one achieves realization in the entryways to Dharma.
When the practitioner is sitting in dhyana, on account of cultivating
contemplation, the mind may suddenly open up and become awakened such
that one's wisdom is sharp and clear. However, it may be that the mind
of meditative absorption is still only faint and scant. In such a case
the mind may be moved and scattered. Like a lamp [flame] in the wind it
does not completely illuminate things. In such a case one is unable to
leave behind birth and death. At such a time one should return to the
cultivation of stopping. On account of cultivating stopping one then
gains the mind of meditative absorption. Like the lamp [flame] in a
closed room it is immediately able to dispel the darkness and illuminate
things clearly. This is a summary explanation of the cultivation of the
two dharmas of stopping and contemplation in order to establish equal
balance of meditative absorption and wisdom. If the practitioner is able
to skillfully utilize these five concepts in this manner as he
cultivates stopping and contemplation while sitting correctly with the
body upright, and if in selecting them and dispensing with them he does
not fail to accord with what is appropriate, then one should know that
this person skillfully cultivates the Dharma of the Buddha. Because one
is able to cultivate skillfully he most certainly will not pass through
this one lifetime in vain. Next, the second [mode]. Here we explain the
cultivation of stopping and contemplation while moving through objective
conditions and in relation to the objective sphere. Constantly sitting
with the body upright is the supreme essential for entering the Way.
However, a person with responsibilities must necessarily be involved in
phenomenal conditions. If one adapts to objective conditions in relating
to the objective sphere and yet fails to cultivate stopping and
contemplation, this will produce gaps in and severances of the mind of
cultivation. In such a case the karma of the fetters will arise where
one comes into contact [with the objective sphere]. How then could one
succeed in quickly achieving interactive correspondence with the Dharma
of the Buddha? If a person is at all times constantly cultivating
skillful means related to meditative absorption and wisdom, one should
know that this person will certainly be able to reach a penetrating
understanding of all of the Buddha's dharmas. What is meant by
cultivating stopping and contemplation as one moves through objective
conditions? As for what is referred to as "objective conditions," it
refers to six kinds of objective conditions. The first is walking; the
second is standing; the third is sitting; the fourth is lying down; the
fifth is doing things; and the sixth is speaking. What is meant by
cultivating stopping and contemplation in relation to the objective
sphere? As for what is referred to as "the objective sphere," it refers
to the sphere of the six [sense] objects. The first is the eye in
relation to forms; the second is the ear in relation to sounds; the
third is the nose in relation to fragrances; the fourth is the tongue in
relation to flavors; the fifth is the body in relation to tangibles; and
the sixth is the intellectual mind in relation to dharmas [as objects of
mind]. It is based on the practitioner's cultivation of stopping and
contemplation in relation to these twelve phenomena that one speaks of
the cultivation of stopping and contemplation as one moves through
objective conditions and as one relates to the objective sphere. First,
walking. At times when one is involved in walking one should bring forth
this thought, "For what purpose do I now wish to walk?" If it is on
account of being directed by afflictions or unwholesome or neutral
matters, then one should not walk. If it is not an instance of being
directed by the afflictions and if it is for the sake of a matter which
produces wholesome benefits and which is in accord with the Dharma, then
one should walk. How does one go about cultivating stopping while
walking? If one is walking one maintains the awareness that it is on
account of walking that there may exist all of the dharmas of the
afflictions, of good and bad, and so forth. If one is completely aware
that the mind engaged in walking as well as all dharmas present in
walking cannot be gotten at, then the false-thinking mind ceases. This
constitutes the cultivation of stopping. How does one go about
cultivating contemplation while walking? One should bring forth this
thought, "It is on account of the mind that one moves the body. As a
result one has that forward movement referred to as "walking." It is on
account of walking that there may then exist all of the dharmas of the
afflictions, of good and bad, and so forth." One should then immediately
turn around [one's attention] and contemplate the mind which is engaged
in walking. One does not perceive any characteristic appearance in it.
One should then realize that the one who walks as well as all dharmas
involved in walking are both ultimately empty and still. This
constitutes the cultivation of contemplation. Second, standing. If one
is standing one should bring forth this thought, "On account of what
endeavor do I now wish to stand?" If it is for the sake of the
afflictions or unwholesome or neutral endeavors that one stands then one
should not stand. If it is for the sake of good and beneficial endeavors
then one should stand. How does one go about cultivating stopping while
standing? If one is standing one maintains the awareness that it is on
account of standing that there may then exist all of the dharmas of the
afflictions, of good and bad and so forth. If one is completely aware
that the mind engaged in standing as well as all of the dharmas involved
in standing cannot be gotten at then the false-thinking mind ceases.
This constitutes the cultivation of stopping. How does one go about
cultivating contemplation while standing? One should bring forth this
thought, "It is on account of the mind that the body is brought to a
stop. As a result one refers to "standing." It is on account of this
standing that there may then exist all of the dharmas of the
afflictions, of good and bad, and so forth." One should then turn back
one's attention and contemplate the mind engaged in standing. One does
not perceive any characteristic appearance. One should then realize that
the one who stands as well as all of the dharmas involved in standing
are ultimately empty and still. This constitutes the cultivation of
contemplation. Third, sitting. If one is sitting one should bring forth
this thought, "On account of what endeavor do I now wish to sit?" If it
is for the sake of the afflictions or unwholesome or neutral matters,
then one should not sit. If it is for the sake of good and beneficial
endeavors then one should sit. How does one go about cultivating
stopping while sitting? If one is engaged in sitting then one should be
completely aware that it is on account of sitting that one may then have
all of the dharmas of the afflictions, of good and bad and so forth.
However, there is not one single dharma which can be gotten at. If [one
realizes this] then false thoughts will not arise. This constitutes the
cultivation of stopping. How does one go about cultivating contemplation
while sitting? One should bring forth this thought, "It is on account of
what is thought by the mind that one sets up the body with the legs
folded up. It is on account of this that one may have all of the dharmas
of good, of bad, and so forth. Thus one refers to "sitting." In turning
around the attention to contemplate the mind engaged in sitting one does
not perceive any characteristic appearance. One should then realize that
the one who sits as well as all dharmas involved in sitting are
ultimately empty and still. This constitutes the cultivation of
contemplation. Fourth, lying down. When one is lying down one should
bring forth this thought, "On account of what endeavor do I now wish to
lie down?" If it is on account of some matter which is unwholesome or
neglectful, then one should not lie down. If it is for the sake of
bringing the four great elements into adjustment and harmony, then one
ought to lie down like the king of the lions. How does one go about
cultivating stopping when lying down? If one is going to sleep then one
ought to become completely aware that on account of lying down there may
be all manner of dharmas of good, bad, and so forth. However, there is
not one single dharma which can be gotten at. If [one remains aware of
this] then false thinking will not arise. This constitutes the
cultivation of stopping. How does one go about cultivating contemplation
when lying down? One should bring forth this thought, "It is on account
of becoming worn out and exhausted that one then becomes beclouded and
dim and then lets loose of the six sense faculties. It is on account of
this that one may then have all of the dharmas of the afflictions, of
good and bad, and so forth." One should then turn back one's attention
and contemplate the mind. One does not perceive any characteristic
appearance in it. One should then realize that the one who lies down as
well as all of the dharmas involved in lying down are ultimately empty
and still. This constitutes the cultivation of contemplation. Fifth,
engaging in actions. When one is engaging in actions one should bring
forth this thought: "On account of what matter do I now wish to perform
engage in an action such as this?" If it is for the sake of matters
which are unwholesome, neutral, and so forth, then one should not act.
If it is for the sake of good and beneficial matters, then one should
act. How does one go about cultivating stopping in the midst of engaging
in actions? If one is involved in carrying out actions, then one should
be completely aware that it is on account of engaging in actions that
there may then exist all of the dharmas of good, bad, and so forth.
However, there is not one single dharma which can be gotten at. If [one
becomes aware of this] then false thoughts will not arise. This
constitutes the cultivation of stopping. What is meant by cultivating
contemplation while engaging in actions? One should bring forth this
thought: "It is on account of the mind's controlling the movement of the
body and hands that one engages in endeavors. It is because of this that
there may come to exist all of the dharmas of good, bad, and so forth.
Hence the concept termed 'engaging in action.'" One turns back [the
attention] and contemplates the mind which engages in actions. One does
not perceive any characteristic appearance. One should realize then that
the agent of actions as well as all of the dharmas involved in engaging
in actions are ultimately empty and still. This constitutes the
cultivation of contemplation. Sixth, speaking. When one is involved in
speaking one should bring forth this thought: "On account of what matter
do I now wish to speak?" If one would thereby follow along with
afflictions or if it is for the sake of discussing matters which are
unwholesome, neutral, and so forth, then one should not speak. If it is
for the sake of good and beneficial matters, then one should speak. What
is meant by cultivating stopping in speaking? If one is engaged in
speaking one maintains the awareness that on account of this speaking
there may then come to exist all of the dharmas of the afflictions, of
good and bad, and so forth. One becomes completely aware that the mind
which engages in speaking and all dharmas of the afflictions and of good
and bad cannot be gotten at. Thus the mind which brings forth false
thoughts comes to a rest. This constitutes the cultivation of stopping.
What is meant by cultivating contemplating in the midst of speaking? One
should bring forth this thought: "It is based on the initial and
secondary thought of the mind that one provokes the breath to move
through the throat, the lips, the tongue, the teeth and the palate. Thus
one emits sound as the words of speech. It is because of this speaking
that there may then come to exist the dharmas of good, bad, and so
forth. Hence the concept termed 'speech.'" One turns back [the
attention] and contemplates the mind which engages in speaking. One does
not perceive any characteristic appearance. One should then realize that
the one who speaks as well as all of the dharmas involved in speaking
are ultimately empty and still. This constitutes the cultivation of
contemplation. The six concepts involved in the cultivation of stopping
and contemplation such as have been set forth above are to be employed
in a manner which adapts to what is appropriate and which accords with
the exigencies of the moment. In each and every case they involve the
five previously-[explained] ideas related to stopping and contemplation
[which should be implemented] in the manner discussed above.(2) Next,
the cultivation of stopping and contemplation at the entrances of the
six [sense] faculties. First, cultivation of stopping when the eye views
forms. Whenever there is the viewing of form it is like the moon
[reflected in] water. There is no definite reality involved. If one sees
forms with which one is temperamentally agreeable, one does not give
rise to desirous affection. If one sees forms to which one is
temperamentally opposed, one does not give rise to hateful affliction.
If one sees forms to which one is neither opposed nor agreeable one does
not give rise to ignorance or any form of chaotic thinking. This
constitutes the cultivation of stopping. What is meant by the
cultivation of contemplation when the eyes view form? One should bring
forth this thought: "No matter what is viewed, those very characteristic
features are empty and still. How is this the case? Within the sphere of
the sense faculty, sense object, space and light, nothing is seen by any
of them nor is there any discrimination which takes place. The
combination of causes and conditions generates eye consciousness. Next,
there occurs the arisal of the mind consciousness. It is then
immediately able to make distinctions among all of the various types of
forms. It is on account of this that there may then come to exist all of
the dharmas of the afflictions, good and bad, and so forth." One should
immediately turn back [the attention] and contemplate the mind which
bears forms in mind. One does not perceive any characteristic
appearance. One should then realize that the one who sees as well as all
of the other associated dharmas are ultimately empty and still. This
constitutes the cultivation of contemplation. Second, the cultivation of
stopping when the ear hears sounds. Whichever sounds are heard by the
ear, one immediately realizes that the sounds are characterized by being
like echoes. If one hears sounds with which one is temperamentally
agreeable one does not give rise to an affectionate mind. As for sounds
to which one is temperamentally opposed, one does not give rise to a
hateful mind. And as for sounds to which one is neither opposed nor
agreeable, one does not give rise to a discriminating mind. This
constitutes the cultivation of stopping. What is meant by the
cultivation of contemplation in the hearing of sounds? One should bring
forth this thought: "No matter what sound is heard, it is empty and is
utterly nonexistent. It is only from the coming together of the sense
faculty and the sense object that there is the generation of ear
consciousness. Next, the mind consciousness arises and in a forced
manner gives rise to discriminations. It is because of this that there
may then come to exist all of the dharmas of the afflictions, good and
bad, and so forth." One turns back [the attention] and contemplates the
mind which hears sounds. One does not perceive any characteristic
appearance. One should then realize that the one who hears as well as
all of the other associated dharmas are ultimately empty and still. This
constitutes contemplation. Third, the cultivation of stopping when the
nose smells fragrances. No matter what fragrances are smelled one
immediately realizes that they are like flames and are unreal. If one
smells fragrances with which one is temperamentally agreeable one does
not give rise to a mind characterized by attachment. As for smells to
which one is temperamentally opposed one does not give rise to a hateful
mind. And as for smells towards which one is neither opposed nor
agreeable, one does not bring forth chaotic thinking. This constitutes
the cultivation of stopping. What is meant by the cultivation of
contemplation in the smelling of fragrances? One should bring forth this
thought: "The fragrances which I am now smelling are false, deceptive
and unreal. How is this the case? It is because of the coming together
of the sense faculty and the sense object that there is then produced
the olfactory consciousness. Next, there is the production of the mind
consciousness. In a forced manner it seizes upon the characteristics of
fragrances. It is because of this that there may then come to exist all
of the dharmas of the afflictions, good and bad, and so forth. Hence we
have what is termed the smelling of fragrances." One turns back [the
attention] and contemplates the mind which smells fragrances. One does
not perceive any characteristic appearance. One should then realize that
the one who smells fragrances as well as all of the other associated
dharmas are ultimately empty and still. This constitutes the cultivation
of contemplation. Fourth, the cultivation of stopping when the tongue
experiences tastes. No matter what tastes are experienced one
immediately realizes that they are like tastes obtained in a dream or a
fantasy. If one obtains a marvelous flavor towards which one is
temperamentally agreeable one does not give rise to desirous attachment.
As for bad tastes towards which one is temperamentally opposed, one does
not give rise to a hateful mind. And as for tastes towards which one is
neither opposed nor agreeable, one does not give rise to discriminating
thoughts on the part of the intellectual mind. This constitutes the
cultivation of stopping. What is meant by cultivating contemplation when
the tongue experiences tastes? One should bring forth this thought: "In
reality, the tastes which are now being experienced cannot be gotten at.
How is this the case? Both subjectively and objectively the six flavors
are in their nature devoid of distinctions. It is because the
subject-related tongue organ comes into conjunction with them that
gustatory consciousness arises. Next one gives rise to mind
consciousness. In a forced manner it seizes upon the characteristics of
flavors. It is because of this that there may then come to exist all of
the dharmas of the afflictions, good and bad, and so forth." One turns
back [the attention] and contemplates the consciousness which takes
tastes as its objective conditions. One does not perceive any
characteristic appearance. One should then realize that the one who
experiences tastes as well as all of the other associated dharmas are
ultimately empty and still. This constitutes the cultivation of
contemplation. Fifth, the cultivation of stopping when the body
experiences tactile sensations. No matter which tactile sensations
become the object of awareness one immediately realizes that they are
like a reflection, an illusion, or a conjuration, and are unreal. If one
experiences a pleasurable tactile sensation to which one is
temperamentally agreeable, one does not give rise to desirous
attachment. If one experiences painful tactile sensations to which one
is temperamentally opposed, one does not give rise to hateful
affliction. If one experiences tactile sensations to which one is
neither opposed nor agreeable, one does not give rise to thoughts which
retain them in mind nor does one engage in making distinctions among
them. This constitutes the cultivation of stopping. What is meant by the
cultivation of contemplation when the body experiences tactile
sensations? One should bring forth this thought: "Lightness and
heaviness, coolness and heat, roughness and slickness, and other such
dharmas all constitute tactile sensations. The six sections of the body
consisting of the head and so forth constitute what is referred to as
the body. The nature of tactile sensations is that they are empty and
false. The body too is unreal. It is through the coming together of
causes and conditions that there is the arisal of physical
consciousness. There next arises the mind consciousness which engages in
recollective thought and the making of distinctions with regard to the
characteristics of pleasure, pain and so forth. On account of this one
refers to the experiencing of tactile sensations." One turns back the
attention and contemplates the mind which takes tactile sensations as
objective conditions. One does not perceive any characteristic
appearance. One should then realize that the one who experiences tactile
sensations as well as all of the other associated dharmas are ultimately
empty and still. This constitutes the cultivation of contemplation.
Sixth, the features of the cultivation of stopping and contemplation in
the midst of the mind's awareness of dharmas are as already explained at
the beginning in the section on sitting. From among the above features
relating to the cultivation of stopping and contemplation in dependence
upon the six sense faculties one implements whichever ones correspond to
[the faculty] one intends to utilize. The five concepts discussed
earlier are inherent in each and every one of these situations.(3) They
have already been extensively detailed herein. Hence we will not now
repeat the analysis. If the practitioner is able to cultivate stopping
and contemplation at every point as he walks, stands, sits, lies down,
sees, hears, experiences awareness, and so forth, then one ought to know
that this person truly cultivates the Mahayana Way. As stated in The
Great [Perfection of Wisdom] Sutra, "The Buddha told Subhuti, 'If when
the bodhisattva walks he is aware of walking, if when he sits he is
aware of sitting, and so forth until we come to when he dons the
sa.nghaa.tii, gazes or blinks he is single-minded. [And so too it is as]
he exits from and enters into dhyana absorption. One should know that
this person is to be known as a bodhisattva, [an exemplar] of the
Mahayana. Furthermore, if a person is able to cultivate the Great
Vehicle in every place and in this manner, this person is the most
superior in all the world. He is the most supreme and has no peer. A
verse from The Treatise [on the Great Perfection of Wisdom] states:
Easefully sitting within the forest, Quiescently extinguishing every
ill, Serenely gaining unity of mind,-- This bliss is not the bliss of
the heavens. People seek after worldly profit, Renowned attire, fine
beds and cushions. This bliss is neither peaceful or secure. In seeking
profit there is no satisfaction. The patched-robed one abides in
deserted places. Moving and stopping, his mind is always one.
Spontaneously employing the clarity of wisdom, He contemplates the
reality mark of the dharmas. In all of the different classes of Dharma,
All are entered through contemplation of equality. The mind of
understanding wisdom is quiescent. Throughout the three realms there are
none ranked as peer. [End of Chapter Six] **ENDNOTES** 1. The four types
of deportment are walking, standing, sitting, and lying down. 2. This
refers to the five concepts discussed earlier, namely, cultivating
stopping and contemplation as means: 1) to counter the coarseness and
chaos of the beginner's mind; 2) to counter the disorders of mental
"sinking," or "floating;" 3) to accord with whatever is appropriate; 4)
to counteract subtle states of mind occurring in meditative absorption;
5) to achieve equal balance in meditative absorption and wisdom. 3.
Again, this refers to the five concepts discussed earlier, namely,
cultivating stopping and contemplation as means: 1) to counter the
coarseness and chaos of the beginner's mind; 2) to counter the disorders
of mental "sinking," or "floating;" 3) to accord with whatever is
appropriate; 4) to counteract subtle states of mind occurring in
meditative absorption; 5) to achieve equal balance in meditative
absorption and wisdom.

### Chapter Seven: The Manifestation of Roots of Goodness

If the practitioner is able in this manner to skillfully cultivate
stopping and contemplation, going from the conventional into the
contemplation of emptiness, as he sits [in dhyana meditation] his body
and mind will become bright and pure. At such time there may occur the
development and manifestation of many different sorts of roots of
goodness. One must recognize and be aware of them. Now, we explain in
brief the signs associated with the manifestation of roots of goodness.
There are two different categories. First, the signs associated with the
manifestation of external roots of goodness: This refers to the
development and manifestation of roots of goodness associated with
giving, upholding precepts, filial dutifulness to parents, veneration of
seniors, making offerings to the Triple Jewel, listening to and studying
[the teachings], and so forth. These are external matters. If one is not
engaged in correct cultivation, these may spill over into [and manifest
as] demonic states [of mind]. We will not now analyze these in detail.
Second, the signs of the manifestation of internal roots of goodness.
This refers to the development and manifestation of roots of goodness
associated with dhyana absorption Dharma gateways. There are three
concepts in this regard. The first, the explanation of the signs of the
manifestation of roots of goodness. There are five different categories.
First, the signs associated with the manifestation of roots of goodness
related to the pathways of the breath. On account of the practitioner's
skillfully cultivating stopping and contemplation, the body and mind
become regulated correctly and false thinking comes to a halt. Because
of this, one becomes aware that his mind gradually enters into
meditative absorption. One develops meditative absorptions such as those
associated with the desire realm and [specifically], the preliminary
ground (anaagamya, a.k.a. "access concentration").(1) The body and mind
become as if they have perished and are empty and quiescent. The mind
associated with meditative absorption becomes peaceful and stable. In
the midst of this meditative absorption, one does not perceive any
appearance whatsoever of a body or a mind. Then afterwards one may
continue on through one sitting session or two sitting sessions, and so
forth until we come to one day, two days, one month or two months. One
may be unable to bring this to a rest and so it may be that one does not
retreat from it nor does it disappear. Then in the midst of meditative
absorption one may suddenly become aware of the body and mind moving and
provoking the manifestation of eight tactile sensations, namely the
awareness of physical pain, itching, coldness, heat, lightness,
heaviness, roughness, smoothness, and so forth. At that time when there
is the manifestation of these dharmas of tactile sensation, the body and
mind are peaceful and stabilized. There is an empty and subtle
blissfulness. One's happiness and pleasure are pure and indescribable
even by simile. This constitutes signs of the manifestation of roots of
goodness related to the awareness of the pathways of breath and the
basic dhyana absorption. In the preliminary ground of the desire realm
the practitioner suddenly becomes aware of the exiting, entry and
duration of the breath and of its moving emptily [in and out] through
the hair pores of the entire body. Then one sees with the mind's eye the
thirty-six things contained within the body just as when, upon opening
up a pantry, one sees all of the sesame, beans, and so forth. The mind
becomes greatly startled and delighted. One is quiescent, peaceful and
happy. These constitute signs of the manifestation of roots of goodness
corresponding to the special ascendant practices associated with the
breath.(2) Second, the signs of the manifestation of roots of goodness
related to the contemplation of impurity. When the practitioner is
immersed in the meditative absorption of the desire realm's preliminary
ground his body and mind may become empty and still in the midst of this
meditative absorption, [whereupon he may experience the following
signs]: He may suddenly observe the physical death of some other man or
woman and then following upon that death [he may observe] the bloating
and rotting [of that corpse], the presence of worms and the flowing
forth of pus. [He may] then observe the whitened bones scattered about.
His mind may become affected by sorrow and delight and he may then
experience revulsion and abhorrence for that which he had loved. These
are signs indicating the manifestation of roots of goodness related to
the nine visualizations.(3) Or perhaps in the midst of still meditative
absorption he may suddenly observe the impure things inside of the body,
[he may observe] someone else's body as bloated and scattered, or [he
may observe] his own body as a white skeleton from the head to foot with
every one of the bones remaining supported in position by the others.
After having seen this phenomenon, the mind of absorption may become
peaceful and stable. One may experience a startling awakening to [the
fact of] impermanence. One may then develop revulsion and abhorrence for
the five objects of desire, and may then desist from attachment to
either oneself or other persons. These are signs of the manifestation of
roots of goodness related to the liberations.(4) Or perhaps when the
mind is immersed in meditative absorption one may observe everything as
utterly impure whether it be with regard to one's own body, the bodies
of others, flying birds, crawling beasts, clothing, drink, food,
dwellings, mountains or forests. These are signs indicating the
manifestation of roots of goodness related to [the contemplation of] the
great [all-encompassing] impurity. Third, the signs of the manifestation
of roots of goodness related to the mind of loving-kindness. If on
account of cultivating stopping and contemplation the practitioner
succeeds in entering the meditative absorption of the desire realm's
preliminary ground, while he is immersed in this meditative absorption,
[there may occur the following signs]: He may suddenly bring forth a
mind characterized by a lovingly-kind mindfulness of other beings
wherein there appear to him signs indicating that persons with whom he
has close affinities gain happiness. He may then immediately develop
deep meditative absorption wherein his own mind manifests a pure
blissful happiness indescribable even by simile. Similar phenomena may
occur with regard to people towards whom he has only middling affinities
and towards people who have been his enemies and may then extend to all
of the beings within the five destinies throughout the ten directions.
When he arises from meditative absorption his mind is blissfully happy
such that, no matter whom he sees, his countenance remains constantly
harmonious. These are signs of the manifestation of roots of goodness
related to the mind of loving-kindness. The signs of the manifestation
of the mind of compassion, the mind of sympathetic joy, and the mind of
equanimity may all be understood through comparison to this. Fourth, the
signs of the manifestation of roots of goodness related to the
contemplation of causes and conditions. It may be that on account of
cultivating stopping and contemplation the practitioner gains the desire
realm's preliminary ground meditative absorption in which the body and
mind abide in stillness. He may then suddenly experience the arisal of a
mind of awakening [characterized by the following signs]: In
deliberating upon the causes and conditions of ignorance, karmic
formative factors (sa.mskaaras), and so forth [as they interact]
throughout the three periods of time he does not perceive the [inherent]
existence of either others or a self. He then immediately transcends
annihilationism and eternalism, smashes all attachments and views, and
gains the peace and security of meditative absorption. Understanding and
wisdom manifest. Dharma joy comes forth in his mind and he does not
think of any worldly matters. His experience proceeds in this manner to
include the five aggregates, the twelve sense fields, and the eighteen
sense realms wherein his analytic [realization] extends in the same
manner. These are the signs of the manifestation of roots of goodness
related to the contemplation of causes and conditions. Fifth, the signs
of the manifestation of roots of goodness related to mindfulness of the
buddha. It may be that on account of cultivating stopping and
contemplation the practitioner gains the desire realm's preliminary
ground meditative absorption wherein his body and mind are empty and
still [and he experiences the following]: He may immediately bring forth
in his mind the inconceivable and ineffable meritorious qualities and
major and minor characteristics of the buddha, including all of the ten
powers, the fearlessness, the dharmas special to the buddha, the
samadhis, the liberations, and other such dharmas, the inconceivable and
ineffable superknowledges and [spiritual] transformations, unobstructed
eloquences, and the vast benefits [the buddhas] provide to beings. When
he brings forth this thought regarding such an incalculable number of
inconceivable and ineffable meritorious qualities, he then manifests a
mind imbued with affection and reverence, samadhi develops, the body and
mind become blissful, pure, peaceful and secure, and become free of any
unwholesome characteristics. When he arises from dhyana absorption his
body and mind are unencumbered and sharp. He becomes personally aware
that these meritorious qualities are lofty and impressive and that they
are loved and revered by others. These are signs of the manifestation of
roots of goodness related to the mindfulness-of-the-buddha samadhi.
Furthermore, in the event that the practitioner gains clarity and purity
of body and mind on account of cultivating stopping and contemplation,
he may then experience signs of the manifestation [of roots of goodness
related to] impermanence, suffering, emptiness, nonexistence of self,
impurity, renounceability of the world, or impurity of food. [Or those
signs may be related to] deliberative contemplations on death, on
separation [from desire], on extinction, mindfulness of the Buddha, of
the Dharma, of the Sangha, of the precepts, of renunciation, or of the
heavens. [They may be related to] the stations of mindfulness, the right
efforts, the foundations of psychic power, the roots, the powers, the
constituents of enlightenment, the Way, emptiness, signlessness,
wishlessness (lit. "endeavorlessness"), the six perfections, the [other]
paaramitaas, the superknowledges, the transformations, and so forth. [He
may experience] signs of the manifestation [of roots of goodness related
to] any of the Dharma entryways. [Ideally], these should all be analyzed
extensively herein. Hence it states in a sutra: "If one controls the
mind [so that it abides] in a single place, there is no endeavor which
is not accomplished." Second, "distinguishing between the true and the
false" consists of two parts. The first is "articulating the signs of
the manifestation of false dhyana absorptions." When the practitioner
experiences the manifestation of dhyana absorptions such as discussed
above, it may be that on account of the dharmas which have become
manifest [he experiences the following]: It may be that the body moves
uncontrollably. At times the body may feel heavy as if something was
pressing down and smashing it. At times the body may feel light as if it
was about to fly. At times it might feel as if it were tied up. At times
it may feel as if one were twisting around, being suspended while being
cooked. Or at times it may feel as if one were being subjected to
boiling or cold. At times one may experience strong heat. Or perhaps one
might see all sorts of strange mental states. At times one's mind may
become dark and covered over. At times one may bring forth all sorts of
evil initial thoughts. Or at times one may bring to mind external
scatteredness relating to miscellaneous wholesome endeavors. Or perhaps
at times one may experience delight or agitated movement. Or at times
one may become worried or preoccupied with sad thoughts. Or perhaps at
times one may experience unwholesome tactile sensations whereby the
hairs on the body stand on end. Or at times one may become so immensely
happy that one is [as if] confused or inebriated. All sorts of deviant
dharmas such as these, when manifesting together with dhyana absorption,
constitute [signs of] falseness. If one becomes affectionately attached
to these deviant meditative absorptions then [one's behavior]
corresponds to the dharmas of one of the ninety-five kinds of ghosts and
spirits. In the majority of cases one then becomes prone to losing one's
mind [of correct determination] and becoming mentally deranged.
Sometimes the ghosts, spirits, and other [such beings] become aware that
a person has become mentally attached to their dharma and so then
increase the intensity of the power [associated with it] such that [the
practitioner] then manifests all sorts of deviant meditative
absorptions, deviant forms of intelligence, eloquence and spiritual
powers whereby he then influences people of the world through deception.
When the common foolish person observes this he is of the opinion that
[the practitioner] has gained the fruit of [cultivating] the Way. They
all believe in and submit to him even though in his mind he has become
[attached to] inverted views and even though he practices only the
dharma of ghosts and engages in the deception and confusion of [people
in] the world. When such a person's life comes to an end he will remain
eternally unable to encounter the Buddha and will return to fall down
into the path of the ghosts and spirits. If when he has been sitting [in
meditative absorption] he has mostly practiced evil dharmas then he will
immediately fall into the hells. If when the practitioner cultivates
stopping and contemplation he achieves dhyana absorptions like these
which are possessed of these signs of falseness he should then
immediately get rid of them. How does one get rid of them? If one
becomes aware of the presence of falseness and deception, he should
establish himself in correctness of mind and desist from accepting or
becoming attached [to these meditative states]. They should then
diminish and disappear. If one implements correct contemplation to
demolish them, they should immediately become extinguished. Second,
"articulating the signs of the manifestation of true and correct dhyana
absorption." When the practitioner is engaged in sitting meditation and
there manifest dhyana absorptions wherein there are none of the
above-described false dharmas [he should observe the following signs]:
When each and every dhyana absorption manifests, one is immediately
aware of its corresponding to [right] meditative absorption. One
experiences emptiness, brightness, and purity. Internally, one's mind is
delighted. One feels tranquil and blissful. There are no situations in
which one's [mind] is covered over. The mind of goodness comes forth and
manifests. One's faith and reverence increase and grow. One's mirror of
wisdom becomes sharply focused and clear. The body and mind are supple
and pliant. One experiences a subtle and marvelous emptiness and
quiescence. One develops a revulsion for and abhorrence of [the ways of]
the world. There is nothing [which one feels needs] to be done and one
is free of desires. In going forth and entering into [meditative
absorption] one is sovereignly independent. These are the signs of the
manifestation of correct dhyana absorptions. Just as when working with
evil people, one constantly encounters mutual aggravation, whereas when
working together with good people, one eventually observes their fine
points, so too it is in distinguishing between the signs inherent in
deviant versus correct dhyana absorption. Third, "clarifying the use of
stopping and contemplation to increase the growth of roots of goodness."
When one is sitting [in meditation] and roots of goodness manifest, one
should employ the two dharmas of stopping and contemplation to cause
them to increase and advance. If it is appropriate to employ stopping
then one uses stopping to cultivate them. If it is appropriate to employ
contemplation then one uses contemplation to cultivate them. One does
this in a manner which accords with the previous discussions. This
constitutes a summary explanation of the major ideas [related to this
topic]. 1. Anaagamya = Wei-dao di. DFB - 817a = wei-jr ding DFB - 816b.
2. Awareness of the entry of the breath, awareness of the exiting of the
breath, awareness of the length of the breath, awareness of the breath
pervading the body, experiencing joy, experiencing bliss, and mind's
generation of bliss are all included within the "sixteen special
ascendant practices" (shr-lyou te-sheng). See DFB - 213c. 3. The nine
visualizations are: 1) The bloated corpse; 2) The bluish corpse; 3) The
damaged corpse; 4) The The blood-smeared corpse; 5) The purulent,
rotting corpse; 6) The corpse which has been gnawed at [by scavenging
animals and insects; 7) The scattered corpse; 8) The skeletal corpse;
and 9) The burned corpse. See DFB-172a-b. 4. The eight liberations (ba
bei-she a.k.a. ba jye-two) . See DFB-136a-c.

### Chapter Eight: Recognizing the Work of Demons

In Sanskrit, the term is "mara." In the language of the Ch'in, it is
rendered as "killer." They plunder the practitioner's merit wealth and
slay the wisdom life of the practitioner. As for its consequently being
referred to as "the work of demons," just as the Buddha takes as his
work the use of merit and wisdom to liberate beings that they might
enter nirvana, the demons take as their work the continual destruction
of being's roots of goodness that they might be caused to flow along and
turn about in the realm of birth and death. If one is able to establish
the mind in the correct Way, it therefore becomes a case of "where the
way is lofty one knows then that the demons will flourish." Hence it is
still necessary to be skillful in the recognition of the work of demons.
There are only four categories: First, the affliction demons; second,
the demons of the [five] aggregates, [twelve] sense bases, and
[eighteen] sense fields; third, the death demons; and fourth, the
ghost-and-spirit demons. Three of them are normal worldly phenomena as
well as products of a given individual's mind. One must get rid of them
by rectifying one's own mind, thus exorcizing them. We will not describe
them in detail just now. As for the signs of the ghost-and-spirit
demons, these matters must be understood. We shall now discuss them
briefly. There are three categories of ghost-and-spirit demons: [First,
the sprites, goblins, and creatures of the twelve {daily} horary time
periods; second, "dwei-ti" demons; and third, demonic-affliction
{demons}]. As for the first, the sprites, goblins, and creatures of the
twelve [daily] horary time periods, they transform into all sorts of
different shapes and forms, perhaps creating the form of a young girl or
an old man and so on, including fearsome bodies and so forth not limited
to any single type. They aggravate and deceive the practitioner. All of
these sprites and goblins desire to afflict practitioners. Each of them
comes at a time corresponding to its appointed hour. It is necessary to
become skillful in distinguishing and recognizing them. If they come
during the yin time period [of 3 to 5 a.m.], they are certainly tigers
or other such creatures. If they come during the mao period [of 5 to 7
a.m.], they are certainly rabbits, deer, and so forth. If they come
during the chen period [of 7 to 9 a.m.], they are certainly dragons,
turtles, and so forth. If they come during the ssu time period [of 9 to
11 a.m.], they are certainly snakes, pythons, and so forth. If they come
during the wu period [of 11 a.m. to 1 p.m], they are certainly horses,
mules, camels, and so forth. If they come during the wei time period [of
1 to 3 p.m], they are certainly sheep, and so forth. If they come during
the shen time period [of 3 to 5 p.m], they are certainly monkeys,
baboons, and so forth. If they come during the you time period [of 5 to
7 p.m], they are certainly chickens, crows, and so forth. If they come
during the syu time period [of 7 to 9 p.m], they are certainly dogs,
wolves, and so forth. If they come during the hai time period [of 9 to
11 p.m], they are certainly pigs and such. If they come during the dze
time period [of 11 p.m. to 1 a.m.], they are certainly rats and such. If
they come during the chou time period [of 1 to 3 a.m.], they are
certainly oxen and such. If the practitioner observes that they always
come at this particular time, he may then know which creature goblin it
is. He should then declare its name to scold and rebuke it whereupon it
should retreat and disappear. Second, the dwei-ti ghosts. They too
engage in all sorts of aggravations which they visit upon practitioners.
Sometimes they manifest like insects or scorpions which attack a
person's head or face, producing a drilling and piercing sensation
attended by intense bright light. Sometimes they strike or constrict a
person's sides or perhaps suddenly clutch a person in their embrace, or
sometimes they speak, make noises, howl, and even appear in the forms of
beasts. These different signs which they manifest in coming to aggravate
the practitioner are not limited to any single one. One should recognize
them immediately and single-mindedly close the eyes, blocking them from
view, and then scold them, saying these [or other such] words, "I now
recognize you. You are a shr-hwo (this is the name of the cassowary
bird), an evil-smelling ji-jr from Jambudvipa who steals one's purity in
the precepts. You are under the sway of deviant views and delight in
destroying the ranks of the precept-observers. I am now an upholder of
the precepts and will never fear you." If one is a monastic, he should
recite the precept texts. If one is a householder, he should recite the
three refuges, the five precepts, and so forth. The ghost will then be
driven off and will crawl away. All sorts of other such appearances
which present difficulties and which aggravate people as well as other
techniques for cutting them off and getting rid of them are all just as
extensively described in the sutras on dhyana meditation. Third,
afflictions inflicted by demons. Typically, these demons
transformationally create three kinds of phenomenal states within the
sphere of the five sense objects which they bring forth to demolish the
wholesome mind: In the case of the first type wherein they create
disagreeable phenomena, these appear as fearsome manifestations of the
five sense objects which cause a person to be filled with terror. In the
case of the second type wherein they create agreeable phenomena, these
appear as desirable manifestations of the five sense objects which cause
a person to become mentally attached. In the case of the third type
which involves phenomena which are neither agreeable nor disagreeable,
these appear as neutral manifestations of the five sense objects which
distract and confuse the practitioner. On account of this the demons are
also referred to as "killers," are also referred to as "floral arrows,"
and are also referred to as "the five-fold arrows." This is on account
of their "shooting" a person [where he is vulnerable] in the five sense
faculties. Within "name-and-form" they create all sorts of phenomenal
states which deceive and confuse the practitioner. In a case where they
create agreeable phenomenal states they may manifest in the form of
parents, siblings, buddhas, attractive men or women, or as other
desirable phenomena which cause a person to become mentally attached. In
a case where they create disagreeable phenomenal states they may
manifest in the forms of tigers, lions, or rak.sas or in all sorts of
other fearsome appearances by means of which they come forth to
terrorize the practitioner. In a case where they create phenomenal
states which are neither disagreeable nor agreeable, they may [manifest]
ordinary phenomena which they employ to distract and confuse the mind of
the practitioner, thus causing the loss of dhyana absorption. Hence they
are referred to as "demons." They may also create all sorts of fine or
terrible sounds, or may create all sorts of fragrant or stinking smells,
or may create all sorts of fine or terrible tastes, or may create all
sorts of anguishing or blissful phenomenal states which they bring forth
to inflict upon a person's body. These are all the work of demons. Their
signs are multifarious. We will not now describe them all. To bring up
and speak of that which is essential, wherever there is the creation of
all sorts of phenomena among the five sense objects which aggravate and
confuse a person, causing the loss of good dharmas and the arisal of
affliction, these are all [the work of] the demon armies. They are able
to employ them to destroy the normal state of the Buddha''s Dharma and
to cause the arisal of all sorts of Way-blocking dharmas such as desire,
worry, anger, sleepiness, and so forth. This is as described in a verse
from a sutra: Desire is the foremost of your armies. Worry is the
second. Hunger and thirst are the third army. Craving is the fourth.
Sleepiness is the fifth of your armies. Fearfulness is the sixth. Doubt
and remorse are the seventh army. Anger is the eighth. Offering and
empty praises are the ninth. Pridefulness and arrogance are the tenth.
Numerous armies such as these Subdue and bury the monastic. Using the
power of dhyana and wisdom, I Smash all of these armies of yours, And
after achieving the Way of the Buddha, Cross over all beings to
liberation. Once the practitioner has recognized the work of demons he
should immediately drive them away. There are two methods for driving
them away: The first involves using stopping to drive them off. Whenever
one observes any of the external evil demon states, knowing that they
are false and deceptive, one refrains from becoming either worried or
fearful. Nor does one grasp at them or retreat from them or indulge in
any erroneous calculations or distinctions with regard to them. Placing
the mind at rest so that it is quiescent, they should naturally
disappear on their own accord. The second involves using contemplation
to drive them off. If one observes any of the different kinds of demon
states similar to those discussed above and one finds that even though
one employs stopping they nonetheless do not go away, one should then
immediately turn back one's attention and contemplate the observing
mind. One does not perceive any place [in which it abides]. What then is
it that is being afflicted? When one contemplates in this manner, as one
continues on with [the process] they should disappear. If they are slow
to respond and thus do not go away one should rectify one's own mind and
refrain from generating thoughts of terror. One should not even fear for
the loss of one's own physical life. One should rectify one's thought so
that it does not move. One should recognize that the suchness of the
demon realm is just the suchness of the buddha realm and [should thus
recognize] that if the suchness of the demon realm and the suchness of
the buddha realm are a single suchness, there cannot be two [different]
suchnesses. If one understands completely in this way, [one will
understand that] there is nothing in the demon realm to be relinquished
and nothing in the buddha realm to be seized upon. Of its own accord,
the Dharma of the Buddha should then naturally manifest before one,
whereupon the demon state should naturally dissolve and disappear.
Additionally, if one observes that a demon state does not disappear, one
need not give rise to distress. If one observes that it does disappear,
one must not become joyful, either. Why is this? We have not yet
observed a case of a person sitting in dhyana absorption who has seen
the demon transform into a tiger or a wolf which has then [actually]
come forth and eaten the person. Nor have we yet observed a case of a
demon transforming into a man or woman which has [actually] come forth
and acted as a husband or a wife. It is through the the taking on of a
particular illusory transformation on the part of a foolish person who
fails to completely understand it that the mind consequently becomes
alarmed or even goes so far as to give rise to desirous attachment. On
account of this, the mind becomes confused, one loses one's meditative
absorption and one may even become insane. One brings about one's own
calamity. In every case, it is a matter of the practitioner bringing on
a calamity through the absence of wisdom. It is not a case of something
actually brought about by the demon. If demon states occur which
aggravate and disturb the practitioner and which don't go away even
after months and years have passed, one must simply make one's own mind
upright so that the rectitude of one's own thoughts is solid. [In doing
this] one should not spare even one's own physical life. One must not be
filled with distress or fearfulness. One should recite the
demon-countering mantras found within the Great Vehicle Vaipulya
(fang-deng) sutras. One should recite them silently and abide in
mindfulness of the Triple Jewel. Even when one has emerged from dhyana
absorption one should still recite the mantras as a self-protective
measure. One should perform repentances, should maintain a sense of
shame and a sense of blame, and should also recite the praatimok.sa. The
deviant is unable to interfere with whatsoever is [actually] orthodox.
After a time it will fade away on its own accord. The work of demons is
of many different sorts. A [complete] discussion of it would be endless.
One must be skillful in recognizing it. Hence the novice practitioner
must draw near to a good and knowledgeable advisor specifically because
there can occur difficult situations such as these. These demons may
enter into a person's mind whereupon they become able to cause the
practitioner's mind and spirit to become crazy and disturbed so that he
becomes overcome with joyfulness or distress. On account of this, a
calamity can occur which could even lead to one's death. At times they
may cause one to gain deviant dhyana absorptions, wisdom, spiritual
powers, dhaara.niis, or even cause one to speak Dharma and engage in
teaching and conversion whereby others all have faith and submit. In the
end one may do damage to other people's wholesome, world-transcending
endeavors and may even destroy the correct Dharma. The various strange
phenomena of this sort are not of a single type. In describing them,
they are endless. Now, we only briefly explain their essential features
for the sake of causing the practitioner to avoid erroneously taking on
phenomenal states [which arise] when sitting in dhyana absorption. To
speak of it in a way which grasps what is essential, if one desires to
drive away the deviant and return to the orthodox one should contemplate
the reality mark of all dharmas. If one skillfully cultivates stopping
and contemplation, there is no deviant phenomenon which will not be
demolished. Hence The Treatise [on the Great Perfection of Wisdom]
states: "Aside from the reality mark of all dharmas, everything else is
demonic phenomena." This is as described in a verse: If one engages in
discriminating recollective thought, This is just the net of the maaras.
If one does not move and refrains from discriminations, This then is the
seal of Dharma. [End of Section Eight]

### Chapter Nine: The Treatment of Disorders

When the practitioner establishes his mind in the cultivating of the
Way, it may be that there develop disorders related to the four great
elements. On account of the present use of the contemplative mind, the
"drum" of the breath may instigate the activation of originally-existing
disorders. Sometimes it happens that one is unable to skillfully and
appropriately adjust the three factors of body, mind and breath. As a
result, pathological calamities may occur due to interferences between
the internal and the external situations. Now, as for the dharma of
sitting in dhyana absorption, if one is able to skillfully apply the
mind, then the four hundred and four kinds of disorders will naturally
be gotten rid of or cured. If, however, one fails in the correct
placement of the mind, then the four hundred and four kinds of disorders
may arise on account of that. Therefore, whether one is engaged in
practice oneself, or whether one is teaching others, one must become
skilled in recognizing the causes of disorders. One must know well the
methods for treating disorders related to the subjective mind engaged in
sitting [meditation]. If someday one activates a disorder, it may not
simply be a matter of developing an obstruction to practice of the Way,
it may be that one has to contemplate the loss of this one great life.
Now, in the explanation of the treatment of disorders there are two
ideas [which must be set forth]. First one explains the signs which
arise when disorders manifest. Secondly one explains the methods
employed in the treatment of disorders. First, the explanation of the
signs which arise when disorders manifest. Although there are many
different species of disorders which may manifest, when set forth in
brief, they do not go beyond two categories. The first are the signs
related to the increase or decrease in the four great elements. If the
great element of earth becomes excessive, then there may be swelling,
obstruction, submersion, or heaviness, and the body may become
emaciated. One hundred and one maladies of this sort may arise. If the
great element of earth becomes excessive, then there may be the
production of the thick and thin disease-related fluids and there may be
edema and "fullness." Food and drink may not digest, the abdomen may be
painful, there may be diarrhea, and one hundred and one different types
of maladies may arise. If the great element of fire becomes excessive,
then there may be strong fever in which steaming heat [alternates] with
coldness. The joints may all become painful. The respiration, urination
and defecation may not occur with normal ease and there may occur one
hundred and one different maladies of this sort. Hence a scripture
states, "When a single great element is out of adjustment, one hundred
and one kinds of disorders may arise. When the four great elements are
out of adjustment, four hundred and four disorders may all be activated
at one time." When the disorders associated with the four great elements
manifest, each of them possesses a characteristic appearance. One should
examine [one's situation in this regard] when one is sitting and even
during one's dreams. Second, the signs which occur when the five "dzang"
organs develop maladies. In the case where a malady has developed from
[a cause associated with] the heart, the body may become either cold or
hot and there may be headaches or such symptoms as dryness of the mouth
on account of the heart's serving as the ruler of the mouth. In the case
where a malady has developed from [a cause associated with] the lungs,
the body may become edematous, the four limbs may become aggravatingly
painful, the heart may become depressed, or the nose may become stopped
up, and so forth. This [latter symptomology] is on account of the lungs'
serving as the ruler of the nose. In the case where a malady has
developed from [a cause associated with] the liver, there are usually no
joyful thoughts. One may be distressed, worried, or unhappy. One may
have melancholy thoughts or anger. The head may ache, the eyes may
become dim, blurred, or dull. This [latter symptomology] is on account
of the liver's serving as the ruler of the eyes. In the case where a
malady has developed from [a cause associated with] the spleen, in the
body and on the face, a traveling wind goes throughout the body
[causing] minor aching, itching, and pain, and food and drink seem to
have lost their flavor. This [latter symptom] is on account of the
spleen's serving as the ruler of the tongue. In the case where a malady
has developed from [a cause associated with] the kidneys, the throat may
inclined towards feeling choked or obstructed, the abdomen may become
distended, and the ears may become hard of hearing. This [latter
symptom] is on account of the kidneys' serving as the ruler of the ears.
The disorders produced from the five dzang organs are of many different
sorts. Each of them presents its own particular signs. One will be able
to understand [one's particular situation] through examining it while
one is sitting and even during one's dreams. The causality involved in
pathological maladies associated with the four great elements and the
five dzang organs are not limited to a single type. The symptoms are of
many different varieties. They cannot be completely described. If the
practitioner wishes to cultivate the Dharma entryway of stopping and
contemplation, perhaps there may be maladies which arise. One should
become skillful in recognizing their causal bases. These two categories
of disorder may both be activated through either internal or external
[causes]. In the case of injury from external cold, wind or heat, food
and drink may not digest properly and so the disorder may manifest
through both of the avenues [of the elements and the organs]. One should
know then that this has been activated on account of external [causes].
In the case where one causes maladies to arise in both places through
incorrect adjustment of the mind, through contradictory and unorthodox
contemplative practice, or through not understanding appropriateness in
the give-and-take required when the dharmas of meditative absorption are
manifesting, these are instances of pathological symptoms manifesting on
account of internal [causes]. Additionally, there are three different
categories of causes and conditions for becoming afflicted with
disorders: The first consists of excesses and deficiencies in the four
great elements and five dzang organs as discussed earlier. The second
consists of disorders gotten through the actions of ghosts and spirits.
The third consists of disorders gotten as a result of karmic
retribution. Disorders such as these are very easily cured if they are
treated immediately when first contracted. If they go on for a long
time, then the pathology becomes established. If the body becomes
emaciated and the disorder becomes bound in place then, in the treatment
of it, it may be difficult to cure. Second, explaining the methods for
treating the disorders. Having deeply understood the origins of a
disorder's arisal and manifestations, one should implement a method for
treating it. The methods employed in the treatment of disorders are of
many types. To bring up those which are essential, they do not go beyond
the two skillful means of stopping and contemplation. How does one use
stopping as a treatment for the symptoms of a disorder? There are
masters who say that if one simply establishes the mind in stopping at
the site of the disorder one will be immediately able to cure the
disorder. Why is this? The mind is the ruler of this one period of
effect-phase retribution. This is just as whenever a king goes
somewhere, the bands of rebels immediately scatter. Next, there are
masters who say that one inch below the navel is known as the udaana.
This refers to what we know as the "dan tyan." (lit. "the field [for
cultivating] the pill [of immortality].") [They state that] if one is
able to stop the mind and guard [its position] at this location without
becoming scattered, then after one has done this for a long time, then
in most cases, there will be that which is remedied. There are [other]
masters who say that if one constantly anchors the mind's [attention]
beneath the feet without regard to whether one is walking, standing, or
lying down to sleep, one will be able to cure disorders. Why is this?
This is because it is on account of non-regulation of the four great
elements that most illnesses occur. This is brought about by the mind's
consciousness becoming anchored in a higher position, thus causing the
four great elements to become unregulated. If one anchors the mind
below, then the four great elements will naturally become appropriately
adjusted and the various disorders will be gotten rid of. There are
masters who state that one need only realize that all dharmas are empty
and that nothing whatsoever exists. If one refrains from seizing upon
the symptoms of illness while quiescently abiding in stopping, then in
most cases there will be that which is cured. Why is this? This is
because the mind's recollective thought pumps up the four great elements
and therefore disorders arise. If one puts the mind to rest in harmony
and happiness the various disorders will then be cured. Hence The
Vimalakiirti Sutra states, "What is it that constitutes the origin of
disease? It is the so-called 'manipulation of conditions.' How does one
cut off the manipulation of conditions? This is done through what is
referred to as 'non-attainment on the part of the mind.'" All sorts of
explanations such as these which promote using stopping to treat the
symptoms of disease are not limited to just a single type. Hence one
should understand that through skillful cultivation of the dharma of
stopping one is able to treat a multitude of disorders. Next, the
explanation of using contemplation to treat disorders. There are masters
who state that one need only engage in contemplation which employs the
mind's [visualizing] thought while also employing six kinds of breath to
treat disorders. This is just a case of contemplation being able to
treat disorders. What are the six kinds of breath? The first is blowing
(chwei). The second is exhaling (hu). The third is mirthful tittering
(syi). The fourth is puffing (he). The fifth is drawn-out breathing
(syu). The sixth is normal breathing (sz).(1) These six kinds of breath
are all created within the lips and mouth and are a skillful means
employed by the visualizing mind as one turns to the side. They are done
in a soft and subtle manner. A verse states: The heart belongs to "he"
and the kidneys belong to "chwei." That the spleen is "hu" and the lungs
are "sz" is known to all the sages. When the liver heats up the "syu"
word comes forth. Wherever the Triple Warmer is blocked, one need only
say "syi." There are masters who say that if one is skillful in using
contemplative visualizations in implementing twelve different kinds of
breath one is able to treat a multitude of maladies. The first is an
ascending breath. The second is a descending breath. The third is a
"filling" breath. The fourth is a burning breath. The fifth is a breath
of extended length. The sixth is a destructive breath. The seventh is a
warm breath. The eight is a cool breath. The ninth is a forcefully
exhaled breath. The tenth is a "retained" breath. The eleventh is a
harmonious breath. The twelfth is a restorative breath. All twelve of
these breaths arise from the visualizing mind. We now briefly explain
the counteractive features of the twelve types of breath. The ascending
breath counters sinking and heaviness. The descending breath counteracts
emptiness and suspendedness. The "filling" breath counteracts
emaciation. The burning breath counteracts distention. The breath of
extended length counteracts injury through wasting away. The
"destructive" breath counteracts excessive repletion. The warm breath
counteracts coldness. The cold breath counteracts heat. The forcefully
exhaled breath counteracts obstructions which do not open up. The
"retained" breath counteracts shaking. The harmonious breath counteracts
disharmony in the four great elements. The restorative breath fortifies
deterioration in the four great elements. If one is skillful in using
these kinds of breath one may be able to treat a multitude of maladies.
If one extrapolates from this one will be able to reach an
understanding. There are masters who say that if one is skillful in
employing visualizing contemplations in the sphere of the conventional
one will be able to treat a multitude of disorders. For instance if a
person is afflicted with coldness one may visualize the fire energy
arising within the body and then be able to counteract the coldness.
This accords with the Agama Sutra's extensive discussion of seventy-two
secret therapeutic techniques. There are masters who say that one need
only employ stopping and contemplation to carry out investigative
analyses within the body [so as to realize that] the disorders of the
four great elements cannot be gotten at and that the disorders of the
mind cannot be gotten at. Thus the multitude of disorders will then be
cured of themselves. There are all sorts of explanations such as these
whereby one employs contemplation to treat disorders. Their
implementations differ. However, if one realizes well their meanings
they all may be able to treat disorders. One should understand that if
one realizes well the meanings inherent in the two techniques of
stopping and contemplation, there is no disorder which will not be cured
thereby. However, the faculties and potential of people of the present
age are shallow and dull. When they carry out these contemplative
visualizations, they often fail to succeed. Thus they do not circulate
widely in the world. As an additional point, one must not go beyond
these techniques to pursue the study of energy-manipulation skills or
diets requiring desisting from cereal grains. It is feared that one will
then develop heterodox views. Mineral and herbal medicines can be useful
in the treatment of disease. They too may be consumed [for this
purpose]. If it is a case of a disorder caused by ghosts one should
employ a forceful mind in the application of mantras, using them as a
means to help with the treatment. If it is a case of a disorder brought
on by karmic retribution, then it is essential to cultivate merit and
[purifying] repentances. The malady will then disappear. In the case of
these two types of methods for the treatment of disorders, where a
person has realized well a single concept he may share his own practice
experiences with others, how much the more is this acceptable where one
has reached a complete and penetrating realization. However, if one has
no knowledge of any of this then a disorder may arise for which there is
no treatment. Then not only would this constitute a wasting away of
one's cultivation of right Dharma, but one fears it might also be a case
of one's very life being in danger. How then could one employ one's own
practice experience as a basis for teaching others? Therefore, a person
who wishes to cultivate stopping and contemplation must well understand
the techniques for treating disorders which lie within the province of
one's own mind. Those techniques are not limited to a single approach.
The realization of the concept is something which is particular to each
person. How then could one be able to transcribe such a thing in
writing? Furthermore, when one applies one's mind to the treatment of
disorders while engaged in sitting meditation, it is still essential to
also include ten dharmas of which there are none which fail to provide
benefit. The ten dharmas are: First, faith; second, utilization; third,
diligence; fourth, staying constantly focused on the [selected]
objective condition; fifth, distinguishing the causality of the
disorder; sixth, skillful means; seventh, long-enduring practice;
eighth, understanding selection and relinquishing; ninth, upholding and
protecting; and tenth, avoiding obstacles. What is meant by "faith"?
This refers to having faith that this technique is certainly able to
cure the disorder. What is meant by "utilization"? This refers to
constant utilization at all times. What is meant by "diligence"? This
refers to utilization of the technique in a focused, intense and
unceasing manner wherein one takes the achievement of a cure as the
standard [for finally desisting]. What is meant by "staying focused on
the objective condition"? This refers to the subtle mind abiding in
reliance on the dharma in every single thought-moment while not straying
off onto different objective conditions. What is meant by
"distinguishing the causality of the disorder"? This is as discussed
above. What is meant by "skillful means"? This refers to being skillful
while not failing in appropriateness as one brings to perfection subtle
meditative respiration, application of the mind, and objective
visualizations. What is meant by "long-enduring practice"? This means
that if when one utilizes a technique and does not gain immediate
benefits from it, one ignores the passage of days or months while
continuing to be constant and unfailing in carrying on the practice.
What is meant by "understanding selection and relinquishment"? This
means that where one becomes aware of benefits [in a given technique]
one is then diligent whereas where one discovers harmfulness [in a given
technique] one immediately relinquishes it. One is extremely subtle in
the turning of the mind to the task of making adjustments and
implementing treatments. What is meant by upholding and protecting? This
means that one is skillful in recognizing the [potential] interference
threatened by [straying off onto] different objective conditions. What
is meant by avoiding obstacles? This means that if one realizes some
benefits [in one's practice] one does not broadcast it to others,
whereas where one has not yet seen any harmfulness [in a particular
technique] one refrains from developing doubts and slanders. If one
relies upon these ten dharmas in the application of treatment it will
definitely be efficacious and [one's efforts] will not have been in
vain. [End of section nine] **End Notes** 1. Dhyana Master Bao Jing
cautions the reader to not rely on the actual meaning of the character
so much as on intoning the sound of the character while exhaling very
subtly and performing the related visualization. He refers us to an
extended discussion of this technique in the mwo-he jr-gwan.

### Chapter Ten: Realization of the Fruits [of Cultivating the Way]

When the practitioner cultivates stopping and contemplation in this
manner he may be able to realize that in every case all dharmas arise
from the mind and are empty due to the falseness and insubstantiality of
causes and conditions. Because he realizes that they are empty he is
unable to get at [any reality] in the names and characteristics of any
dharma. This constitutes the stopping achieved through the comprehension
of truth. At such a time, one does not perceive any fruit of buddhahood
above which may be sought after nor does one perceive any beings below
which could be delivered to liberation. This constitutes moving from the
conventional into the contemplation of emptiness. It is also the
contemplation of the two truths, is also [a function of] the wisdom eye,
and is also the wisdom which comprehends everything. If one abides in
this contemplation one falls onto the ground of the Hearers and
Pratyekabuddhas. Thus, [The Lotus] Sutra states: "The assembly of
Hearers and such sighed to themselves and said, 'If we hear of the
purification of buddhalands and of the teaching and transforming of
beings, our minds are not pleased. Why is this? All dharmas are empty
and still. They are neither produced nor destroyed and are neither great
nor small. There are no outflows nor is there anything done. Having
deliberated in this fashion we do not generate any joy or happiness [in
these dharmas].'" One should realize that if one perceives "non-doing"
and [takes that to be] entry into the correct station [of the Way] such
a person will never be able to generate the mind directed toward
samyak-sambodhi. This is a case of failure to perceive the buddha nature
on account of excessive [emphasis on] the power of meditative
absorption. The bodhisattva perfects all of the buddha dharmas for the
sake of all beings. He should not seize upon or become attached to
"non-doing" and thus bring himself to quiescent extinction. At such a
time one should cultivate going from the empty into the contemplation of
the conventional. Then one ought to carefully contemplate [and realize]
that although the nature of the mind is empty, when one abides in the
dual realm of conditions one is still able to bring forth all dharmas
just as if they were illusory transformations. Although they are devoid
of any fixed reality, there still do exist different characteristic
distinctions in the sphere of seeing, hearing, awareness, knowing, and
so forth. When the practitioner contemplates in this manner, although he
realizes that all dharmas are ultimately empty and still, he is
nonetheless able to cultivate all kinds of practices in the midst of
emptiness. It is just as if he were planting a tree in empty space. One
is still able to distinguish the faculties of beings and on account of
the incalculable number of [individual] natures and desires, one is then
able to proclaim an incalculable number of different dharmas. If one is
able to perfect unobstructed eloquence then one will be able to benefit
the beings of the six destinies. This constitutes the stopping
associated with skillful means which accord with conditions. This then
is a moving from the empty into the contemplation of the conventional.
It is also the evenly balanced contemplation, is also the [function of]
the dharma eye, and is also the wisdom which comprehends the varieties
of the Way (dao-jung jr). If one abides in this contemplation, on
account of an excessive [emphasis on the] power of wisdom, although one
perceives the buddha nature, still, one does not clearly and completely
understand it. Although the bodhisattva may perfect these two kinds of
contemplations, this still constitutes a skillful means contemplation
entryway. It is not the case that it constitutes correct contemplation.
Hence [The Bodhisattva Necklace] Sutra states: "The previous two
categories are paths of skillful means. It is because of the
contemplation of these two emptinesses(1) that one succeeds in entering
the contemplation of the primary meaning of the Middle Way. One engages
in simultaneous illumination of the two truths, [one perceives] every
single thought-moment as quiescent extinction, and one naturally flows
on into the sea of sarvaj\~na.(2) If a bodhisattva wishes to perfect all
of the buddha dharmas in a single thought-moment he should cultivate the
stopping which distinguishes the two extremes and should carry it out
within the correct contemplation of the Middle Way." How does one
cultivate the correct contemplation? If one completely comprehends that
the nature of the mind is neither true nor conventionally existent (lit.
"false") and if one puts to rest the mind which takes truth and
conventional existence as objective conditions, this constitutes
correctness. If one truly contemplates the nature of mind as neither
empty nor conventionally existent while still not refuting those dharmas
which are either empty or conventionally existent, and if one is able to
realize this sort of complete illumination, then in the very nature of
mind one achieves a penetrating understanding of the Middle Way and
achieves perfect illumination of the two truths. If one is able to
perceive the Middle Way and the two truths in one's own mind then one
perceives the Middle Way and the two truths in all dharmas while still
not seizing upon either the Middle Way or the two truths. Because no
definite and fixed nature can be found [herein] this constitutes the
correct contemplation of the Middle Way. This is as set forth in a verse
from The Treatise on the Middle: All dharmas produced of causes and
conditions, I declare them to be empty. They are also [simply]
conventional designations, And also [embody] the meaning of the Middle
Way. In deliberating deeply on the intent of this verse [one finds that]
it not only completely delineates the characteristics of the
contemplation of the middle but also simultaneously clarifies the import
of the previous two provisional contemplation gateways. One should
realize that the correct contemplation of the Middle Way constitutes the
buddha eye's wisdom of all modes (i-chye jung jr). If one abides in this
contemplation, then the powers of meditative absorption and wisdom are
equal, one completely and utterly perceives the buddha nature and one
becomes peacefully established in the great vehicle. "His steps are even
and correct and his speed is as fleet as the wind."(3) One then
naturally flows on into the sea of sarvaj\~na. "One practices the
practice of the Thus Come One. One enters the room of the Thus Come One.
One dons the robe of the Thus come One. One sits in the seat of the Thus
Come One."(4) In this case one then takes the adornment of the Thus Come
one as one's own adornment and succeeds in realizing purification of the
six faculties.(5) One enters into the state [of realization] of a
buddha. One has no defiling attachment to any dharma. All of the
buddha's dharmas entirely manifest before one and one perfects the
mindfulness-of-the-buddha samadhi. One becomes peacefully established in
the foremost Suura'ngama meditative absorption. This is the samadhi
wherein one realizes the universal manifestation of the form body. One
universally enters all of the buddhalands of the ten directions, teaches
and transforms beings, adorns and purifies all of the buddha k.setras,
makes offerings to the buddhas of the ten directions, receives and
maintains the Dharma treasury of all buddhas, perfects the paaramitaas
of all practices, awakens to and enters into the station of the great
bodhisattvas, and in doing so becomes an equal companion of [the
bodhisattvas] Samantabhadra and Ma\~njushrii. Having come to eternally
abide in the Dharma nature body one is then praised by the buddhas and
given a prediction [of buddhahood]. One then adorns the Tu.sita Heaven,
manifests descent into the womb of one's spiritual mother, leaves behind
the homelife, goes to the Way place, conquers the demon adversaries,
realizes the right enlightenment, turns the wheel of Dharma, and then
enters nirvana. Throughout the ten directions one brings to perfect
completion all of the buddha's endeavors and becomes complete in the two
bodies, the true [body] and the response [body]. This then is the
[realization] of the bodhisattva who has initially brought forth the
resolve. In the Floral Adornment Sutra [it states]: "When one first
brings forth the resolve [to attain bodhi] one then realizes the right
enlightenment and gains a completely penetrating understanding of the
true nature of dharmas. All of the wisdoms and bodies are not awakened
to in reliance on others." It also states: The bodhisattva who has first
brought forth the resolve gains the Thus Come One's single body and
creates an incalculable number of [other] bodies." It also states: "The
bodhisattva who has first brought forth the resolve becomes identical to
a buddha." The Nirvana Sutra states: "The bringing forth of the resolve
and the ultimate [realization] are indistinguishable. These two minds
are difficult for the beginner's mind [to fathom]." The
Mahaa-praj\~naa-paaramitaa Sutra states: "Subhuti, there are
bodhisattvas, mahaasattvas who, from the [very time of ] first bringing
forth the resolve, have immediately proceeded to sit in the Way place
where they have been turning the right Dharma wheel. One should realize
that this is a bodhisattva who in his actions is like the Buddha." In
The Lotus Sutra, [the speed of the presentation of] the jewel offered up
by Dragon Daughter serves as a corroborating case. Sutras such as these
all clarify that in the initial setting of resolve one perfects the
enactment of all buddha dharmas. Whether it be The
Mahaa-praj\~naa-paaramitaa Sutra's access [to Dharma] through the use of
the syllable "a", whether it be The Lotus Sutra's [being proclaimed] for
the sake of causing beings to open up the knowledge and vision of the
buddhas, or whether it be the Nirvana Sutra's [concept of] dwelling in
the great nirvana on account of seeing the buddha nature, in each case
they have already briefly described the signs of the realization of the
fruits [of cultivation] which, for the bodhisattva who has initially
brought forth the resolve, occur because of having cultivated stopping
and contemplation. Next, the clarification of the signs of the
realization of the fruits associated with minds at a later stage [of
cultivation]. The states of realization which develop for those with
minds at a later stage [of cultivation] are unknowable [to us]. If we
now extrapolate from what the teaching elucidates one finds that they
are not separate from the two dharmas of stopping and contemplation. How
is this the case? In instances such as that in The Lotus Sutra where it
states, "He assiduously praised the wisdom of the buddhas," this
corresponds to the meaning [inherent in] contemplation. This is a case
of employing a correlation to contemplation as a means of elucidating
the fruits [of cultivation]. As for The Nirvana Sutra's expansive
description employing a hundred statements on the topic of liberation as
a means of explaining the great nirvana, nirvana corresponds to the
meaning [inherent in] stopping. This is a case of employing a
correlation with stopping as a means of elucidating the fruits [of
cultivation]. Therefore it states that the great parinirvaa.na is an
eternal quiescent meditative absorption. As for "meditative absorption,"
it corresponds to the meaning [inherent in] stopping. Although in Lotus
Sutra, the correlation to contemplation is employed as a means of
elucidating the fruits [of cultivation], it is nonetheless also
inclusive of stopping. Hence it states, ". . . and even the ultimate
nirvana's characteristic of eternal quiescent extinction is finally
returnable to emptiness." Although in The Nirvana [Sutra] the
correlation to stopping is employed to elucidate the fruits [of
cultivation], it is nonetheless also inclusive of contemplation. Hence
it takes the three qualities(6) as constituting the great nirvana.
Although there are differences in the texts of these two great sutras as
regards the explicit and the esoteric, it is never the case that they
depart from correspondences to the two entryways of stopping and
contemplation in the articulation of their ultimate [concepts]. They
both rely upon the two dharmas of meditative absorption and wisdom in
order to elucidate the ultimate fruits [of cultivation]. The
practitioner should realize that the initial, middle and later fruits
[of cultivation] are all inconceivable and ineffable. Hence the new
translation of The Golden Light Sutra states, "The Thus Come Ones at the
beginning are inconceivable and ineffable. The Thus Come Ones during the
intermediate phase possess all sorts of adornments. The Thus Come Ones
at the final phase are eternally indestructible." In every case the
correlation to the cultivation of the two minds of stopping and
contemplation is employed to articulate their fruits [of cultivation].
Hence a verse from The Pratyutpanna Samadhi Sutra states: It is by means
of the mind that all buddhas gain liberation. As for the mind, it is
pure and known as undefiled. In the five destinies it is fresh and
immaculate and takes on no form. Where there is one who studies this, he
perfects the great Way. I declare as a matter of solemn oath that as for
that which is practiced, it is essential to get rid of the three
obstacles and the five coverings. In the event that they are not gotten
rid of, even though one might be diligent in applying one's efforts, one
will ultimately gain no benefit from it. [End of Section Ten] [End of
The Dharma Essentials for Cultivating Stopping and Contemplation and
Sitting in Dhyana] 1. Master Bao-jing states that the two types of
emptiness refer here to the emptiness of persons and the emptiness of
dharmas. 2. Sarvaj\~na is the omniscience or all-knowledge of a buddha.
3. This is a quote from "The Analogies Chapter" of The Lotus Sutra where
the great white ox which represents the one buddha vehicle is being
described. Master Bao Jing notes that "Even and correct" refers to the
equality of meditative absorption and wisdom characteristic of a
buddha's perfect contemplation whereas "speed as fleet as the wind"
refers to that perfect contemplation's acuity in reflecting the nature
and entering the way of effortlessness. He notes that the latter phrase
also refers to the practice within the eight-fold path moving speedily
into the sea of sarvaj\~na. 4. Master Bao Jing notes that in this
additional quote from the Lotus Sutra, the "practice" refers to the
practice of a buddha wherein a single practice embodies all practices,
the "robe" refers to patience, the "room" refers to the great
loving-kindness and compassion, and the "seat" refers to the emptiness
of dharmas. 5. Master Bao Jing also notes that "adornment" here refers
to the merit and wisdom of a buddha. 6. The three qualities alluded to
are: praj\~naa, liberation, and the Dharma body.
