---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:54:37'
layout: page
slug: chapter-ten-the-teacher-of-the-law
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Ten: The Teacher of the Law'
wordpress_id: '3576'
---

At that time the World-Honored One addressed Bodhisattva Medicine King.
And through him the eighty thousand great men, saying: "Medicine King,
do you see in this great assembly the immeasurable number of heavenly
beings, dragons kings, yakshas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras,
mahoragas, human and nonhuman beings, as well as monks, nuns, laymen and
laywomen, those who seek to become voice-hearers, who seek to become
pratyekabuddhas, or those seek the Buddha way? Upon these various kinds
of beings who in the presence of the Buddha listen to one verse or one
phrase of the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law and for a moment think of
it with joy I will bestow on all of them a prophecy that they will
attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.\
 \
 The Buddha said to Medicine King: "In addition, if after the Thus Come
One has passed into extinction there should be someone who listens to
the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law, even one verse or one phrase, and
for a moment thinks of it with joy, I will likewise bestow on him a
prophesy that he will attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Again if there
are persons who embrace, read, recite, expound and copy the Lotus Sutra
of the Wonderful Law, even only one verse, and look upon this sutra with
the same reverence as they would the Buddha, presenting various
offerings of flowers, incense, necklaces, powdered incense, paste
incense, incense for burning, silken canopies, streamers and banners,
clothing and music, and pressing their palms together in reverence,
then, Medicine King, you should understand million Buddhas that such
person have already offered alms to a hundred thousand million Buddhas
and in the place of the Buddhas have fulfilled their great vow, and
because they take pity on living beings they have been born in this
human world\
 \
 "Medicine King, if someone should ask what living beings will be able
to attain Buddhahood in a latter-day existence, then you should show him
all these people in a latter-day existence are certain to attain
Buddhahood. Why? Because if good men and good women embrace, read,
recite, expound and copy the Lotus Sutra, even one phrase of it, offer
various kinds of alms to the sutra, flowers, incense, necklaces,
powdered incense, paste incense, incense for burning, silken canopies,
streamers and banners, clothing and music, and press their hands
together in reverence, then these persons will be looked up to and
honored by all the world. Alms will be offered to them such as would be
offered to the Thus Come One. You should understand that these persons
are great bodhisattvas who have succeeded in attaining
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Pitying living beings, they have vowed to be
born among them where they may broadly expound and make distinctions
regarding the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law. How much more so is this
true, then, of those who embrace the entire sutra and offer various
types of alms to it!\
 \
 "Medicine King, you should understand that these persons voluntarily
relinquish the reward due for their pure deeds and, in the time after I
have passed into extinction, because they pity living beings, they are
born in this evil world so they may broadly expound this sutra. If one
of these good men or good women in the time after I have passed into
extinction is able to secretly expound the Lotus Sutra to one person,
even one phrase of it, then you should know that de or she is the envoy
of the Thus Come One. He has been dispatched bf the Thus Come One and
carries out the Thus Come One's work. And how much more so those who in
the midst of the great assembly broadly expound the sutra for others!\
 \
 "Medicine King, if there should be an evil person who, his mind
destitute of goodness, should for the space of a kalpa appear in the
presence of the Buddha and constantly curse and revile the Buddha, that
person's offense would still be rather light. But if there were a person
who spoke only one evil word to curse or defame the lay persons or monks
or nuns who read and recite the Lotus Sutra, then his offense would be
very grave.\
 \
 "Medicine King, these persons who read and recite the Lotus Sutra-you
should understand that these persons adorn themselves with the
adornments of the Buddhas they are borne upon the shoulders of the Thus
Come One. Wherever they may go, one should greet them with bows, with
palms pressed single-mindedly together, with reverence and alms, with
respect and praise, flowers, incense, necklaces, powdered incense, paste
incense, incense for burning, silken canopies, streamers and banners,
clothing, delicacies and the making of music. The finest alms that can
be offered to a person should be offered to them. Heavenly treasures
should be scattered over them, the treasure hoards of heaven should be
given them as gifts. Why do I say this? Because these persons delight in
expounding the Law. And if one listens to them for even a moment, he
will immediately attain the ultimate anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.\
 \
 An that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 If you wish to abide in the Buddha way\
 and successfully gain the wisdom that comes of itself,\
 you should be constantly diligent in offering alms\
 to those who embrace the Lotus Sutra.\
 If you have a wish to quickly obtain\
 wisdom regarding all species of things,\
 you should embrace this sutra\
 and at the same time give alms to those who do so.\
 If one is capable of embracing\
 the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law,\
 know that such a person is an envoy of the Buddha\
 who thinks wit pity of living beings.\
 Those who are capable of embracing\
 the Lotus of the Wonderful Law\
 relinquish their claim to the pure land\
 and out of pity for living beings are born here.\
 Know that persons such as these\
 freely choose where they will be born,\
 and choose to be born in this evil world\
 so they may broadly expound the unsurpassed Law.\
 You should offer heavenly flowers and incense,\
 robes decked with heavenly treasures,\
 the wonderful treasure hoards of heaven\
 as alms to those who preach the Law.\
 In the evil world following my extinction\
 if there are those who can embrace this sutra,\
 you should press your palms together in reverence\
 and offer alms to them as you would to the\
 World-Honored One.\
 The choicest delicacies, all that is sweet and tasty,\
 along with various types of clothing\
 you should offer as alms to these Buddha sons\
 in hopes you may hear a moment of their preaching.\
 If there are those in a later age\
 who can accept and embrace this sutra,\
 they are my envoys sent out among the people\
 to perform the Thus Come One's work.\
 If for the space of a kalpa\
 one should constantly harbor a mind destitute of good\
 and with angry looks should revile the Buddha,\
 he will be committing an offense of immeasurable gravity.\
 But if toward those who read, recite and embrace\
 this Lotus Sutra\
 one should even for a moment direct evil words,\
 his offense will be even greater.\
 If there is someone who seeks the Buddha way\
 and during a certain kalpa\
 presses palms together in my presence\
 and recites numberless verses of praise,\
 because of these praises of the Buddha\
 he will gain immeasurable blessings.\
 And if one lauds and extols those who uphold this sutra,\
 his good fortune will be even greater.\
 For the space of eighty million kalpas,\
 with the most wonderful shapes and sounds,\
 with that which is pleasing to smell, taste and touch,\
 offer alms to the upholders of this sutra!\
 If you have offered alms in this manner\
 and have heard the teachings for even a moment,\
 then you will experience joy and good fortune,\
 saying, "I have gained great benefit!"\
 Medicine King, now I say to you,\
 I have preached various sutras,\
 and among those sutras\
 the Lotus is foremost!\
 \
 At that time the Buddha spoke once more to the bodhisattva and
mahasattva Medicine King, saying: "The sutras I have preached number
immeasurable thousands, ten thousands millions, among the sutras I have
preached, now preach, and will preach, this Lotus Sutra is the most
difficult to believe and the most difficult to understand. Medicine
King, this sutra is the storehouse of the secret crux of the Buddhas, it
must not be distributed recklessly transmitted to others. It has been
guarded by the Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones, and from times past
until now has never been openly expounded, and since hatred and jealousy
toward this sutra abound even when the Thus Come One is in the world,
how much more will this be so after his passing?\
 \
 "Medicine King, you should know that after the Thus Come One has
entered extinction, if there are those who can copy, uphold, read and
recite this sutra, offer alms to it and expound it for others, then the
Thus Come One will cover them with his robe, and they will also be
protected and kept in mind by the Buddhas who are now present in other
regions. Such persons possess the power of great faith, the power of
aspiration, the power of good roots, you should know that such persons
lodge in the same place as the Thus Come One, and the Thus Come One pats
them on the head with his hand.\
 \
 "Medicine King, in any place whatsoever where this sutra is preached,
where it is read, where it is recited, where it is copied, or where a
roll of it exists, in all such places there should be erected towers
made of the seven kinds of gems, and they should be made very high and
broad and well adorned. There is no need to enshrine the relics of the
Buddha there. Why? Because in such towers the entire body of the Thus
Come One is already present. All kinds of flowers, incense, necklaces,
silken canopies. Streamers and banners, music and hymns should be
offered as alms to these towers. And they should be accorded reverence,
honor and praise. If when people see these towers they bow in obeisance
and offer alms, then you should know that such persons have all drawn
near to anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.\
 \
 "Medicine King, suppose there is a man who is parched with thirst and
in need of water. On an upland plateau he begins digging a hole in
search of water, but he sees that the soil is dry and knows that water
is still far away. He does not cease his efforts, however, and bit by
bit he sees the soil becoming damper, until gradually he has worked his
way into mud. Now he is determined in his mind to go on, for he knows
that he is bound to be nearing water.\
 \
 "The way of the bodhisattva is the same as this. As long as a person
has not yet heard. Not yet understood. And not yet been able to practice
this Lotus Sutra, then you should know that person is still far away
from anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Why? Because all bodhisattvas who attain
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi in all cases do so through this sutra. This
sutra opens the gate of expedient means and shows the form of true
reality. This storehouse of the Lotus Sutra is hidden deep and far away
where no person can reach it. But the Buddha, teaching, converting and
leading to success the bodhisattvas, opens it up for them.\
 \
 "Medicine King, if there are bodhisattvas who, on hearing this Lotus
Sutra, respond with surprise, doubt and fear, then you should know that
they are bodhisattvas who have only newly embarked on their course. And
if there are voice-hearers who, on hearing this sutra, respond with
surprise, doubt, and fear, then you should know that they are persons of
overbearing arrogance.\
 \
 "Medicine King, if there are good men and good women who, after the
Thus Come One has entered extinction, wish to expound this Lotus Sutra
for the four kinds of believers, how should they expound it? These good
men and good women should enter the Thus Come One's room put on the Thus
Come One's robe, sit in the Thus Come One's seat, and then for the sake
of the four kinds of believers broadly expound this sutra.\
 \
 "The 'Thus Come One's room' is the state of mind that shows great pity
and compassion toward all living beings. The Thus Come One's robe is the
mind that is gentle and forbearing. The 'Thus Come One's seat is the
emptiness of all phenomena. One should seat oneself comfortably therein
and after that, with a mind never lazy or remiss, should for the sake of
the bodhisattvas and the four kinds of believers broadly expound this
Lotus Sutra.\
 \
 "Medicine King, I will send persons conjured up by magic to other lands
to gather together assemblies to listen to the Law, and I will also send
monks, nuns, laymen and laywomen conjured up by magic to listen to the
preaching of the Law, believe and accept it, and abide by it without
violation. If the preachers of the Law are in an empty and silent place,
I will at that time send large numbers of heavenly beings, dragons,
spirits, gandharvas, asuras, and others to listen to their preaching of
the law. Though I should be in another land, from time to time I will
make it possible for the preachers of the Law to see my body. If they
should forget a phrase of this sutra, I will appear and prompt them so
that they are able to recite the text correctly and in full."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 If you wish to put aside all sloth and remissness,\
 you must listen to this sutra,\
 It is hard to get a chance to hear this sutra,\
 and believing and accepting it too is hard.\
 If a person is thirsty and wants water\
 he may dig a hole in the high plateau,\
 but as long as he sees the soil dry\
 he knows the water is still far away.\
 But bit by bit he sees the soil grow damp and muddy\
 and then he knows for certain he is nearing water.\
 Medicine King, you should understand\
 that people are like this-\
 if they do not hear the Lotus Sutra,\
 they will be far removed from the Buddha's wisdom,\
 But if they hear this profound sutra\
 which defines the Law of the voice-hearer,\
 if they hear this king of the sutras\
 and afterward carefully ponder it,\
 then you should know such persons\
 are close to the wisdom of the Buddha.\
 If a person expounds this sutra,\
 he should enter the Thus Come One's room,\
 put on the Thus Come One's robe,\
 sit in the Thus Come One's seat,\
 confront the assembly without fear\
 and broadly expand it for them, making distinctions.\
 Great pity and compassion are the room.\
 Gentleness and patience are the robe.\
 The emptiness of all phenomena is the seat,\
 and from that the position one should expound the Law for them.\
 \
 If when a person expounds this sutra\
 there is someone who speaks ill and reviles him\
 or attacks him with swords and staves, tiles and stones,\
 he should think of the Buddha and for that reason be patient.\
 In a thousand, ten thousand, million lands\
 I will manifest my pure and durable body\
 and for immeasurable millions of kalpas\
 will expound the Law for living beings,\
 If after I have entered extinction\
 there are those who can expound this sutra,\
 I will send the four kinds of believers, magically conjured,\
 monks and nuns\
 and men and women of pure faith,\
 to offer alms and cause them to listen to the Law;\
 they will lead and guide living beings,\
 assemble them and cause them to listen to the Law.\
 If someone thinks to do evil to the preachers\
 with swords and staves or with tiles and stones,\
 I will dispatch persons magically conjured\
 who will act to guard and protect them.\
 If those who expound the Law\
 are alone in an empty and silent place,\
 and in that stillness where no human voice sounds\
 they read and recite this sutra\
 at that time I will manifest\
 my pure and radiant body for them.\
 If they forget a passage or a phrase\
 I will prompt them so they will be thorough and effective,\
 If persons endowed with these virtues\
 should expound to the four kinds of believers\
 and read and recite the sutra in an empty place,\
 I will enable all of them to see my body.\
 And if the expounders are in an empty and silent place\
 I will send heavenly beings, dragon kings,\
 yakshas, spirits and others\
 to be an assembly and listen to the Law.\
 Persons such as this will delight in expounding the Law,\
 making distinctions and encountering no hindrance.\
 \
 Because the Buddhas guard and keep them in mind.\
 They will be able to bring joy to the great assembly.\
 If one stays close to the teachers of the Law\
 he will speedily gain the bodhisattva way.\
 By following and learning from these teachers\
 he will see Buddhas as numerous as the Ganges sands.
