---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:50:36'
layout: page
slug: chapter-six-bestowal-of-prophecy
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Six: Bestowal of Prophecy'
wordpress_id: '3568'
---

At that time the World-Honored One, having finished reciting these
verses, made an announcement to the great assembly, speaking in these
words: "This disciple of mine Mahakashyapa in future existences will be
able to enter the presence of three thousand billion Buddhas,
World-Honored Ones, to offer alms, pay reverence, honor and praise them,
widely proclaiming the innumerable great doctrines of the Buddhas. And
in his final incarnation he will be able to become a Buddha named Light
Bright Thus Come One, worthy of offerings, of right and universal
knowledge, perfect clarity and conduct, well gone, understanding the
world, unexcelled worthy, trainer of people, teacher of heavenly and
human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One. \
 \
 His land will be called Light Virtue and his kalpa will be called Great
Adornment. The life span of this Buddha will be twelve small kalpas. His
Correct Law will endure in the world for twenty small kalpas, and his
Counterfeit Law for twenty small kalpas. \
 \
 "His realm will be majestically adorned, free of defilement or evil,
shards or rubble, thorns or briers, or the unclean refuse of latrines.
The land will be level and smooth, without high places or sags, pits or
knolls. The ground will be of lapis lazuli, with rows of jeweled trees
and ropes of gold to mark the boundaries of the roads. Jeweled flowers
will be scattered around, and everywhere will be pure and clean. The
bodhisattvas of that realm will number countless thousands of millions,
and the multitude of voice-hearers will likewise be innumerable. There
will be no workings of the devil, and although the devil and the devil's
people will be there, they will protect the Law of the Buddha." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 I announce this to the monks:\
 when I employ the Buddha eye\
 to observe Kashyapa here,\
 I see that in a future existence,\
 after innumerable kalpas have passed,\
 he will be able to attain Buddhahood.\
 In future existences\
 he will offer alms and enter the presence\
 of three thousand billion\
 Buddhas, World-Honored Ones.\
 For the sake of the Buddha wisdom\
 he will carry out brahma practices meticulously\
 and will offer alms to the unexcelled ones,\
 the most honored of two-legged beings.\
 After he has done so. And has practiced\
 all the unsurpassed types of wisdom,\
 in his final incarnation\
 he will be able to become a Buddha.\
 His land will be pure and clean,\
 \
 the ground of lapis lazuli.\
 Many jeweled trees\
 will line the roadsides,\
 with golden ropes to mark the roads,\
 and those who see it will rejoice.\
 It will constantly emit a pleasing fragrance,\
 with heaps of rare flowers scattered around\
 and many kinds of strange and wonderful things\
 for its adornment.\
 The land will be level and smooth,\
 without hills or depressions.\
 The multitude of bodhisattvas\
 will be beyond calculation,\
 their minds subdued and gentle,\
 having attained great transcendental powers,\
 and they will uphold and embrace\
 the Great Vehicle scriptures of the Buddhas.\
 The multitude of voice-hearers\
 will be free of outflows, in their last incarnation,\
 sons of the Dharma King,\
 and their number too will be beyond calculation-\
 even when one looks with the heavenly eye\
 one cannot determine their number.\
 This Buddha will have a life span\
 of twelve small kalpas,\
 and his Counterfeit Law\
 for twenty small kalpas.\
 Light Bright World-Honored One\
 will be of this description.\
 \
 At that time the great Maudgalyayana, Subhuti and Mahakatyayana, all of
them trembling with agitation, pressed their palms together with a
single mind and gazed up at the World-Honored One, their eyes never
leaving him for an instant. Joining their voices in a single sound, they
spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 Great hero and stalwart, World-Honored One,\
 Dharma King of the Shakyas,\
 because you have pity on us,\
 favor us with the Buddha voice!\
 If, because you understand our innermost minds,\
 it would be like sweet dew bathing us,\
 washing away fever and imparting coolness.\
 Suppose that someone coming from a land of famine\
 should suddenly encounter a great king's feast.\
 His heart still filled with doubt and fear,\
 he would not dare to eat the food at once,\
 but if he were instructed by the king to do so,\
 then he would venture to eat.\
 We now are like such a person,\
 for whenever we recall the errors of the Lesser Vehicle,\
 we do not know what we should do\
 to gain the Buddha's unsurpassed wisdom.\
 Though we hear the Buddha's voice\
 telling us that we will attain Buddhahood,\
 in our hearts we still harbor anxiety and fear,\
 like that person who did not dare to eat.\
 But now if the Buddha's prophecy is bestowed upon us,\
 then joy and peace of mind will quickly be ours.\
 Great hero and stalwart, World-Honored One,\
 your constant desire to set the world at ease.\
 We beg you to bestow such a prophecy on us,\
 as you would instruct a starving person to eat.\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, understanding the thoughts in the
minds of his major disciples, made this announcement to the monks:
"Subhuti here in future existences will enter the presence of three
hundred ten thousand million nayutas of Buddhas, offering alms, paying
reverence, honoring and praising them. He will constantly carry out
brahma practices and fulfill the bodhisattva way, and in his final
incarnation he will be able to attain Buddhahood. His title will be Rare
Form Thus Come One, worthy of offerings, of right and universal
knowledge, perfect clarity and conduct, well gone, understanding the
world, unexcelled worthy, trainer of people, teacher of heavenly and
human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One. His kalpa will be named
Possessed of Jewels and his realm will be named Jewel Born. The land
will be level and smooth, the ground made of crystal, it will be adorned
with jeweled trees and be free of hills and pits, rubble and thorns and
the filth from latrines. Jeweled flowers will cover the ground and
everywhere will be pure and clean. The people of his realm will all
dwell on jeweled terraces, in rare and wonderful towers and pavilions.
His voice-hearer disciples will be countless, boundless, beyond the
scope of calculation or simile. The multitude of bodhisattvas will
number countless thousands, ten thousands, millions of nayutas. The life
span of this Buddha will be twelve small kalpas, his Correct Law will
endure in the world for twenty small kalpas, and his Counterfeit Law for
twenty small kalpas. This Buddha will constantly dwell in midair,
preaching the Law for the assembly and saving numberless multitudes of
bodhisattvas and voice-hearers." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 You multitude of monks,\
 I now announce this to you.\
 All of you with a single mind\
 should hear what I say,\
 My major disciple\
 Subhuti\
 is destined to become a Buddha\
 with the title Rare Form.\
 He will offer alms to countless\
 tens of thousands and millions of Buddhas.\
 By following the practices of the Buddhas\
 he will gradually fulfill the great way,\
 and in his final incarnation\
 will acquire the thirty-two features.\
 He will be imposing, exceptional, wonderful,\
 like a jeweled mountain.\
 His Buddha land\
 will be foremost in adornment and purity;\
 no living beings who sees it\
 will fail to love and delight in it.\
 There in the midst, that Buddha\
 will save unreckonable multitudes.\
 In that Buddha's Law\
 will be many bodhisattvas,\
 all of them with keen capacities,\
 turning the wheel of non-regression.\
 That land will constantly\
 be adorned with bodhisattvas.\
 The multitude of voice-hearers\
 will be beyond calculation,\
 all gaining the three understandings\
 and exercising the six transcendental powers.\
 They will dwell in the eight emancipations\
 and possess great authority and virtue.\
 The Law preached by that Buddha\
 will manifest immeasurable\
 transcendental powers and transformations\
 of a wondrous nature.\
 Heavenly and human beings\
 in numbers like the Ganges sands\
 will all press their palms together,\
 listen to and receive the Buddha's words.\
 That Buddha will have a life span\
 of twelve small kalpas,\
 his Correct Law will endure in the world\
 for twenty small kalpas\
 and his counterfeit Law\
 for twenty small kalpas.\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One once more spoke to the multitude of
monks: "Now I say this to you. Great Katyayana here in future existences
will present various articles as offerings and will serve eight thousand
million Buddhas, paying honor and reverence to them. After these Buddhas
have passed into extinction, he will raise a memorial tower for each one
measuring a thousand yojanas in height and exactly five hundred yojanas
in both width and depth. It will be made of gold, silver lapis lazuli,
seashell, agate, pearl and carnelian, with these seven precious
substances joined together. Numerous flowers, necklaces, paste incense,
powdered incense, incense for burning, silken canopies, streamers and
banners will be presented as offerings to the memorial towers. And after
this has been done, he will once more make offerings to twenty thousands
of millions of Buddhas, and will repeat the entire process.\
 \
 "When he has finished offering alms to all the Buddhas, he will fulfill
the way of the bodhisattva and will become a Buddha with the title
Jambunada Gold Light Thus Come One, worthy of offerings, of right and
universal knowledge perfect clarity and conduct, well gone,
understanding the world, unexcelled worthy trainer of people, teacher of
heavenly and human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One. \
 \
 "His land will be level and smooth, the ground made of crystal, adorned
with jeweled trees, with ropes of gold to mark the boundaries of the
roads. Wonderful flowers will cover the ground, everywhere will be pure
and clean, and all who see it will rejoice. The four evil paths of
existence, hell and the realms of hungry spirits, beasts and asuras,
will not exist there. There will be many heavenly and human beings, and
multitudes of voice-hearers and bodhisattvas in innumerable tens of
thousands of millions will adorn the land. That Buddha's life span will
be twelve small kalpas, his Correct Law will endure in the world for
twenty small kalpas, and his Counterfeit Law will endure in the world
for twenty small kalpas." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 You multitude of monks,\
 listen all of you with a single mind,\
 for in what I speak\
 there is nothing that departs from the truth.\
 Katyayana here\
 will give various kinds\
 of fine and wonderful articles\
 as offerings to the Buddhas,\
 and after the Buddhas have entered extinction\
 he will raise seven-jeweled towers\
 and present flowers and incense\
 as offerings to their relics.\
 \
 And in his final incarnation\
 he will gain Buddha wisdom\
 and achieve impartial and correct enlightenment.\
 His land will be pure and clean\
 and he will save innumerable\
 ten thousands of millions of living beings,\
 and will receive offerings\
 from all the ten directions,\
 This Buddha's brilliance\
 no one will be able to equal.\
 His Buddha title will be\
 Jambu Gold Light.\
 Bodhisattvas and voice-hearers,\
 cutting off all forms of existence,\
 countless and immeasurable in number,\
 will adorn his land.\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One spoke to the great assembly: "Now I
say to you. Great Maudgalyayana here will present various kinds of
articles as offerings to eight thousand Buddhas, paying honor and
reverence to them. After these Buddhas have passed into extinction, for
each of them he will raise a memorial tower measuring a thousand yojanas
in height and exactly five hundred yojanas in width and depth. It will
be made of gold, silver, lapis lazuli, seashell, agate, pearl, and
carnelian, with these seven precious substances joined together.
Numerous flowers, necklaces, paste incense, and powdered incense,
incense for burning, silken canopies, streamers and banners will be
presented as offerings. After this has been done, he will also make
offerings to two hundred ten thousand million Buddhas, repeating the
process. \
 \
 "Then he will be able to become a Buddha with the title Tamalapatra
Sandalwood Fragrance Thus Come One, worthy of offerings, of right and
universal knowledge, perfect clarity and conduct, well gone,
understanding the world, unexcelled worthy, trainer of people, teacher
of heavenly and human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One. His kalpa will
be named Joy Replete and his realm Mind Delight. The land will be level
and smooth, the ground made of crystal, jeweled trees will adorn it,
pearls and flowers will be scattered around, everywhere will be pure and
clean, and all who see it will rejoice. There will be many heavenly and
human beings, and the bodhisattvas and voice-hearers will be
immeasurable in number. That Buddha's life span will be twenty-four
small kalpas, his Correct Law will endure in the world for forty small
kalpas, and his counterfeit Law for forty small kalpas." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 This disciple of mine,\
 the great Maudgalyayana,\
 when he has cast off his present body,\
 will be able to see eight thousand,\
 two hundred ten thousand million\
 Buddhas, World-Honored Ones,\
 and for the sake of the Buddha way\
 will offer alms, honor and reverence them.\
 Where these Buddhas are\
 he will constantly carry out brahma practices\
 and for immeasurable kalpas\
 will uphold and embrace the Buddha law,\
 When these Buddhas have passed into extinction\
 he will raise seven-jeweled towers,\
 with golden implements to mark the spot for all time\
 and flowers, incense and music\
 presented as offerings\
 in the memorial towers of the Buddhas.\
 Step by step he will fulfill\
 all the duties of the bodhisattva way\
 and in the land called Mind Delight\
 will be able to become a Buddha\
 named Tamalapatra\
 Sandalwood Fragrance.\
 This Buddha's life span\
 will be twenty-four kalpas.\
 Constantly for the sake of heavenly and human beings\
 he will expound the Buddha way.\
 Voice-hearers innumerable\
 as Ganges sands,\
 with the three understandings and six transcendental powers,\
 will display great authority and virtue.\
 Countless bodhisattvas\
 will be of firm will, diligent in effort,\
 and with regard to the Buddha wisdom\
 non will ever retrogress.\
 After this Buddha has passed into extinction,\
 his Correct Law will endure\
 for forty small kalpas,\
 and his Counterfeit law will be likewise.\
 My various disciples,\
 fully endowed with dignity and virtue,\
 number five hundred,\
 and every one will receive such a prophecy.\
 In a future existence\
 all will be able to attain Buddhahood.\
 Concerning the causes and conditions of past existences\
 as they pertain to me and you\
 I will now preach.\
 You must listen carefully.
