---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 12:03:44'
layout: page
slug: chapter-twenty-one-the-mystic-powers-of-the-tathagata
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Twenty-one: The Mystic Powers of the Tathagata'
wordpress_id: '3598'
---

At that time the bodhisattvas and mahasattvas who had emerged from the
earth, numerous as the dust particles of a thousand worlds, all in the
presence of the Buddha single-mindedly pressed their palms together,
gazed up in reverence at the face of the Honored One, and said to the
Buddha: "World-Honored One, after the Buddha has entered extinction, in
the lands where the emanations of the World-Honored One are present, and
in the place where the Buddha has passed into extinction, we will preach
this sutra far and wide. Why? Because we ourselves wish to gain this
great Law, true and pure, to accept, uphold, read, recite, explain,
preach, transcribe and offer alms to it."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, in the presence of Manjushri and
the other immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of
bodhisattvas and mahasattvas who from of old had dwelled in the saha
world, as well as the monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, heavenly beings,
dragons, yakshas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimvaras, mahoragas,
human and nonhuman beings-before all these he displayed his great
supernatural powers. He extended his long broad tongue upward till it
reached the Brahma heaven, and from all his pores he emitted
immeasurable, countless beams of light that illuminated all the worlds
in the ten directions.\
 \
 The other Buddhas, seated on lion thrones underneath the numerous
jeweled trees, did likewise, extending their long broad tongues and
emitting immeasurable beams of light. When Shakyamuni Buddha and other
Buddhas beneath the jeweled trees thus displayed their supernatural
powers, they did so for fully a hundred thousand years. After that they
drew in their long tongues again, coughed in unison, and altogether
snapped her fingers. The sounds made by these two actions filled all the
Buddha worlds in the ten directions, and the earth in all of them quaked
and trembled in six different ways.\
 \
 The living beings in their midst, the heavenly beings, dragons,
yakshas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoragas, human and
nonhuman beings, thanks to the Buddha's supernatural powers, all saw in
this saha world immeasurable, boundless hundreds, thousands, ten
thousands, millions of Buddhas seated on lion seats under the numerous
jeweled trees, and also saw Shakyamuni Buddha and Many Treasures Thus
Come One seated together on a lion seat in the treasure tower. Moreover,
they saw immeasurable, boundless hundreds, thousands, ten thousands,
millions of bodhisattvas and mahasattvas and the four kinds of believers
who reverently surrounded Shakyamuni Buddha.\
 \
 When they had seen these things, they were all filled with great joy,
having gained what they had never had before. At the time the heavenly
beings in the midst of the sky cried out with loud voices, saying:
"Beyond these immeasurable, boundless hundreds, thousands, ten
thousands, millions of asamkhya worlds there is a land named saha, and
in it a Buddha named Shakyamuni. Now for the sake of the bodhisattvas
and mahasattvas he is preaching in his sutra of the Great Vehicle called
the Lotus of the Wonderful Law., a Law to instruct the bodhisattvas, one
that is guarded and kept in mind by the Buddhas. You must respond with
joy from the depths of your heart, and also offer obeisance and alms to
Shakyamuni Buddha!"\
 \
 When the various living beings heard the voices in the sky, they
pressed their palms together, faced the saha world, and spoke these
words: "Hail, Shakyamuni Buddha! Hail, Shakyamuni Buddha!"\
 \
 Then they took different kinds of flowers, incense, necklaces, banners
and canopies, as well as the ornaments, rare jewels and other wonderful
articles that adorned their persons, and all together scattered them far
off in the direction of the saha world. The objects thus scattered
poured in from the ten directions like clouds gathering together. Then
they changed into a jeweled curtain that completely covered the area
where the Buddhas were. At that time the worlds in the ten directions
were opened up so that there was unobstructed passage from one to the
other and they were like a single Buddha land.\
 \
 At that time the Buddha spoke to Superior Practices and the others in
the great assembly of bodhisattvas, saying: "The supernatural powers of
the Buddhas, as you have seen, are immeasurable, boundless,
inconceivable. If in the process of entrusting this sutra to others I
were to employ these supernatural powers for a measurable, boundless
hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of asamkhya kalpas to
describe the benefits of the sutra, I could never finish doing so. To
put it briefly, all the doctrines possessed by the Thus Come One, the
storehouse of all the secret essentials of the Thus Come One - all these
are proclaimed, revealed, and clearly expounded in this sutra.\
 \
 For this reason, after the Thus Come One has entered extinction, you
must single-mindedly accept, uphold, read, recite, explain, preach and
transcribe it, and practice it as directed. In any of the various lands,
wherever there are those who accept, uphold, read, recite, explain,
preach, transcribe, or practice it as directed, or wherever the sutra
rolls are preserved, whether in a garden, a forest, beneath a tree, in
monks quarters, in the lodgings of white-robed laymen, in palaces, or in
mountain valleys or the wide wilderness, in all these places one should
erect towers and offer alms. Why? Because you should understand that
such spots are places of religious practice. In such places have the
Buddhas gained anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, in such places have the Buddhas
turn the wheel of the Law, in such places have the Buddhas entered
parinirvana."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 The Buddhas, saviors of the world,\
 abide in their great transcendental powers,\
 and in order to please living being\
 they display immeasurable supernatural powers.\
 Their tongues reach to the Brahma heaven,\
 their bodies emit countless beams of light.\
 For the sake of those who seek the Buddha way\
 they manifest these things that are rarely seen.\
 The sound of the Buddhas coughing,\
 the sound of them snapping their fingers,\
 is heard throughout the lands in the ten directions\
 and the earth in all those lands moves in six ways.\
 Because after the Buddha has passed into extinction\
 there will be those who can uphold this sutra,\
 the Buddhas are delighted\
 and manifest immeasurable supernatural powers.\
 Because they wish to entrust this sutra,\
 they praise and extol the person who accepts and upholds it,\
 and though they should do so for immeasurable kalpas\
 they could never exhaust their praises.\
 The benefits gained by such a person\
 are boundless and inexhaustible,\
 like the vast sky in the ten directions\
 that no one can set a limit to.\
 One who can uphold this sutra\
 has in effect already seen me,\
 and likewise has seen Many Treasures Buddha\
 and the Buddhas that are emanations of my body.\
 And he also sees me today\
 as I teach and convert the bodhisattvas.\
 One who can uphold this sutra\
 causes me and my emanations,\
 and Many Treasures Buddha who has already\
 entered extension,\
 all to be filled with joy.\
 The Buddhas who are present in the ten directions\
 and those of past and future ages -\
 he will see them too, offer alms to them\
 and cause them to be filled with joy.\
 The secret essentials of the Law\
 gained by the Buddhas who sat in the place of practice -\
 one who can uphold this sutra\
 will gain them too before long.\
 One who can uphold this sutra\
 will delight in endlessly expounding\
 the principles of the various doctrines\
 and their names and phrases\
 like a wind in the open sky\
 moving everywhere without hindrance or block.\
 After the Thus Come One has passed into extinction,\
 this person will know the sutras preached by the Buddha,\
 their causes and conditions and their proper sequence,\
 and will preach them truthfully in accordance with principle.\
 As the light of the sun and moon\
 can vanish all obscurity and gloom,\
 so this person as he passes through the world\
 can wipe out the darkness of living beings,\
 causing immeasurable numbers of bodhisattvas\
 in the end to dwell in the single vehicle.\
 Therefore a person of wisdom,\
 hearing how keen are the benefits to be gained,\
 after I have passed into extinction\
 should accept and uphold this sutra.\
 Such a person assuredly and without doubt\
 will attain the Buddha way.
