---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:36:22'
layout: page
slug: chapter-one-introduction
status: publish
title: 'Chapter One: Introduction'
wordpress_id: '3549'
---

This is what I heard:\
 \
 At one time the Buddha was in Rajagriha, staying on Mount Gridhrakuta.
Accompanying him were a multitude of leading monks numbering twelve
thousand persons. All were arhats whose outflows had come to an end, who
had no more earthly desires, who had attained what was to their
advantage and had put an end to the bonds of existence, and whose minds
had achieved a state of freedom. \
 \
 Their names were Ajnata Kaundinya, Mahakashyapa, Uruvilvakashyapa,
Gayakashyapa, Nadikashyapa, Shariputra, Great Maudgaly\~yana,
Mahakatyayana, Aniruddha, Kapphina, Gavampati, Revata, Pilindavatsa,
Bakkula, Mahakaushthila, Nanda, Sundarananda, Purna Maitrayaniputra,
Subhuti, Ananda, and Rahula. All were like these, great Arhats who were
well known to others.\
 \
 There were also two thousand persons, some of whom were still learning
and some who had completed their learning.\
 \
 There was the nun Mahaprajapati with her six thousand followers. And
there was Rahula's mother, the nun Yashodhara, with her followers.\
 \
 There were bodhisattvas and mahasattvas, eighty thousand of them, none
of them ever regressing in their search for anuttara-samyaksambodhi. All
had gained dharanis, delighted in preaching, were eloquent, and turned
the wheel of the Law that knows no regression. They had made offerings
to immeasurable hundreds and thousands of Buddhas, in the presence of
various Buddhas had planted numerous roots of virtue, had been
constantly praised by the Buddhas, had trained themselves in compassion,
were good at entering the Buddha wisdom, and had fully penetrated the
great wisdom and reached the farther shore. Their fame had spread
throughout immeasurable worlds and they were able to save countless
hundreds of thousands of living beings.\
 \
 Their names were Bodhisattva Manjushri, Bodhisattva Perceiver of the
World's Sounds, Bodhisattva Gainer of Great Authority, Bodhisattva
Constant Exertion, Bodhisattva Never Resting, Bodhisattva Jeweled Palm,
Bodhisattva Medicine King, Bodhisattva Brave Donor, Bodhisattva Jeweled
Moon, Bodhisattva Moonlight, Bodhisattva Full Moon, Bodhisattva Great
Strength, Bodhisattva Immeasurable Strength, Bodhisattva Transcending
the Threefold World, Bodhisattva Bhadrapala, Bodhisattva Maitreya,
Bodhisattva Jeweled Accumulation, and Bodhisattva Guiding Leader.
Bodhisattvas and mahasattvas such as these numbering eighty thousand
were in attendance.\
 \
 At that time Shakra Devanam Indra with his followers, twenty thousand
sons of gods, also attended. There were also the sons of gods Rare Moon,
Pervading Fragrance, Jeweled Glow, and the Four Great Heavenly Kings,
along with their followers, ten thousand sons of gods.\
 \
 Present were the sons of gods Freedom and Great Freedom and their
followers, thirty thousand sons of gods, Present were King Brahma, lord
of the saha world, the great Brahma Shikhin, and the great Brahma Light
Bright, and their followers, twelve thousand sons of gods. \
 \
 There were eight dragon kings, the dragon king Nanda, the dragon king
Upananda, the dragon king Sagara, the dragon king Vasuki, the dragon
king Takshaka, the dragon king Anavatapta, the dragon king Manasvin, the
dragon king Utpalaka, each with several hundreds of thousands of
followers. \
 \
 There were four kimnara kings, the kimnara king Great Law, and the
kimnara king Upholding the Law, each with several hundreds of thousands
of followers. \
 \
 There were four gandharva kings, and gandharva king Pleasant, the
gandharva king Pleasant Sound, the gandharva Beautiful Sound, each with
several hundreds of thousands of followers. \
 \
 There were four asura kings, the asura king Balin, the asura king
Kharaskandha, the asura king Vemachitrin, and the asura king Rahu, each
with several hundreds of thousands of followers. \
 \
 There were four garuda kings, the garuda king Great Majesty, the garuda
king Great Body, the garuda king Great Fullness, and the garuda king As
One Wishes, each with several hundreds of thousands of followers. And
there was King Ajatashatru, the son of Vaidehi, with several hundreds of
thousands of followers. \
 \
 Each of these, after bowing in obeisance before the Buddha's feet,
withdrew and took a seat to one side. \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, surrounded by the four kinds of
believers, received offerings and tokens of respect and was honored and
praised. And for the sake of the bodhisattvas he preached the Great
Vehicle sutra entitle Immeasurable Meanings, a Law to instruct the
bodhisattvas, one that is guarded and kept in mind by the Buddhas. \
 \
 When the Buddha had finished preaching this Sutra, he sat with his legs
crossed in lotus position and entered into the samadhi of the place of
immeasurable meanings, his body and mind never moving. At that time
heaven rained down mandarava flowers, great mandarava flowers,
manjushaka flowers, and great manjushaka flowers, scattering them over
the Buddha and over the great assembly, and everywhere the Buddha world
quaked and trembled in six different ways. \
 \
 At that time the monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, heavenly beings,
dragons, yakshas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoragas,
human and nonhuman beings in the assembly, as well as the petty kings
and wheel-turning sage kings - all those in the great assembly, having
gained what they had never had before, were filled with joy and,
pressing their palms together, gazed at the Buddha with a single mind. \
 \
 At that time the Buddha emitted a ray of light from the tuft of white
hair between his eyebrows, one of his characteristic features, lighting
up eighteen thousand worlds in the eastern direction. There was no place
that the light did not penetrate, reaching downward as far as the Avichi
hell and upward to the Akanishtha heaven. \
 \
 From this world one could see the living beings in the six paths of
existence in all of those other lands. One could likewise see the
Buddhas present at that time in those other lands and could hear the
sutra teachings which those Buddhas were expounding. At the same time
one could see the monks, nuns laymen, and laywomen who had carried out
religious practices and attained the way. One could also see the
bodhisattvas and mahasattvas who, through various causes and conditions
and various types of faith and understanding and in various forms and
aspects were carrying out the way of the bodhisattva. And one could also
see the Buddhas who had entered parinirvana, towers adorned with the
seven treasures were erected for the Buddha relics. \
 \
 At that time the Bodhisattva Maitreya had this thought: Now the
World-Honored One has manifested these miraculous signs. But what is the
cause of these auspicious portents? Now the Buddha, the World Honored
One, has entered into samadhi. An unfathomable event such as this is
seldom to be met with. Whom shall I question about this? Who can give me
an answer? \
 \
 And again he had this thought: this Manjushri, son of a Dharma King,
has already personally attended and given offerings to immeasurable
numbers of Buddhas in the past. Surely he must see these rare signs. I
will now question him. \
 \
 At this time the monks, nuns, laymen and laywomen, as well as the
heavenly beings, dragons, spirits, and the others all had this thought:
this beam of brightness from the Buddha, these signs of transcendental
powers - now whom shall we question about them? \
 \
 At that time Bodhisattva Maitreya wished to settle his doubts
concerning the matter. And in addition he could see what was in the
minds of the four kinds of believers, the monks, nuns, laymen and
laywomen, as well as the heavenly beings, dragons, spirits and the
others who made up the assembly. So he questioned Manjushri, saying,
"What is the cause of these auspicious portents, these signs of
transcendental powers, this emitting of a great beam of brightness that
illumines the eighteen thousand lands in the eastern direction so we can
see all the adornments of the Buddha worlds there?" \
 \
 Then Bodhisattva Maitreya, wishing to state his meaning once more,
asked the question in verse form: \
 \
 Manjushri,\
 Why from the white tuft between the eyebrows\
 of our leader and teacher\
 does this great light shine all around?\
 Why do mandarava\
 and manjushaka flowers rain down\
 and breezes scented with sandalwood\
 delight the hearts of the assembly?\
 Because of these\
 the earth is everywhere adorned and purified\
 and this world\
 quakes and trembles in six different ways.\
 At this time the four kinds of believers\
 are all filled with joy and delight,\
 they rejoice in body and mind,\
 having gained what they never had before.\
 The beam of brightness from between the eyebrows\
 illumines the eastern direction\
 and eighteen thousand lands\
 are all the color of gold.\
 From the Avichi hell\
 upward to the Summit of Being,\
 throughout the various worlds\
 the living beings in the six paths,\
 the realm to which their births and deaths are tending,\
 their good and bad deeds,\
 and the pleasing or ugly recompense they receive -\
 all these can be seen from here.\
 We can also see Buddhas,\
 those sage lords, lions,\
 expounding and preaching sutras\
 that are subtle, wonderful and foremost.\
 Their voices are clear and pure,\
 issuing in soft and gentle sounds,\
 as they teach bodhisattvas\
 in numberless millions.\
 Their Brahma sounds are profound and wonderful,\
 making people delight in hearing them.\
 Each in his own world\
 preaches the correct Law,\
 following various causes and conditions\
 and employing immeasurable similes,\
 illuminating the Law of the Buddha,\
 guiding living beings to enlightenment.\
 If a person should encounter troubles,\
 loathing old age, sickness and death,\
 the Buddhas preach to him on nirvana,\
 explaining how he may put an end to all troubles.\
 If a person should have good fortune,\
 having in the past made offerings to the Buddhas,\
 determined to seek a superior Law,\
 the Buddhas preach the way of the pratyekabuddha.\
 If there should be Buddha sons\
 who carry out various religious practices,\
 seeking to attain the unsurpassed wisdom,\
 the Buddhas preach the way of purity.\
 Manjushri,\
 I have been dwelling here,\
 seeing and hearing in this manner\
 many things numbering in the thousands of millions.\
 Numerous as they are,\
 I will now speak of them in brief.\
 I see in these lands\
 bodhisattvas numerous as Ganges sands,\
 according with various causes and conditions\
 and seeking the way of the Buddha.\
 Some of them give alms,\
 gold, silver, coral,\
 pears, mani jewels,\
 seashell, agate,\
 diamonds and other rarities,\
 men and women servants, carriages,\
 jeweled hand carriages and palanquins,\
 gladly presenting these donations.\
 Such gifts they give to the Buddha way,\
 desiring to achieve the vehicle\
 that is foremost in the threefold world\
 and praised by the Buddhas.\
 There are some bodhisattvas\
 who give jeweled carriages drawn by teams of four,\
 with railings and flowered canopies\
 adorning their top and sides.\
 Again I see bodhisattvas\
 who give their own flesh, hands and feet,\
 or their wives and children,\
 seeking the unsurpassed way.\
 I also see bodhisattvas\
 who happily give\
 heads, eyes, bodies and limbs\
 in their search for the Buddha wisdom.\
 Manjushri,\
 I see kings\
 going to visit the place of the Buddha\
 to ask him about the unsurpassed way.\
 They put aside their happy lands,\
 their palaces, their men and women attendants,\
 shave their hair and beard\
 and don the clothes of the Dharma.\
 Or I see bodhisattvas\
 who become monks,\
 living alone in quietude,\
 delighting in chanting the sutras. \
 Again I see bodhisattvas\
 bravely and vigorously exerting themselves,\
 entering the deep mountains,\
 their thoughts on the Buddha way.\
 And I see them removing themselves from desire,\
 constantly dwelling in emptiness and stillness,\
 advancing deep into the practice of mediation\
 until they have gained the five transcendental powers.\
 And I see bodhisattvas\
 resting in meditation, palms pressed together,\
 with a thousand, ten thousand verses\
 praising the king of the doctrines.\
 Again I see bodhisattvas,\
 profound in wisdom, firm in purpose,\
 who know how to question the Buddhas\
 and accept and abide by all they hear.\
 I see Buddha sons\
 proficient in both meditation and wisdom,\
 who use immeasurable numbers of similes\
 to expound the Law to the assembly,\
 delighting in preaching the Law,\
 converting the bodhisattvas,\
 defeating the legions of the devil\
 and beating the Dharma drum.\
 And I see bodhisattvas\
 profoundly still and silent,\
 honored by heavenly beings and dragons\
 but not counting that a joy.\
 And I see bodhisattvas\
 living in forests, emitting light,\
 saving those who suffer in hell,\
 causing them to enter the Buddha way.\
 And I see Buddha sons\
 who have never once slept,\
 who keep circling through the forest\
 diligently seeking the Buddha way.\
 And I see those who observe the precepts,\
 no flaw in their conduct,\
 \
 pure as jewels and gems,\
 and in that manner seeking the Buddha way.\
 And I see Buddha sons\
 abiding in the strength of fortitude,\
 taking the abuse and blows\
 of persons of overbearing arrogance,\
 willing to suffer all these,\
 and in that manner seeking the Buddha way.\
 I see bodhisattvas\
 removing themselves form frivolity and laughter\
 and from foolish companions,\
 befriending persons of wisdom,\
 unifying their minds, dispelling confusion,\
 ordering their thoughts in mountain and forest\
 for a million, a thousand, ten thousand years\
 in that manner seeking the Buddha way.\
 Or I see bodhisattvas\
 with delicious things to eat and drink\
 and a hundred kinds of medicinal potions,\
 offering them to the Buddha and his monks;\
 fine robes and superior garments\
 costing in the thousands or ten thousands,\
 or robes that are beyond cast,\
 offering them to the Buddha and his monks;\
 a thousand, ten thousand, a million kinds\
 of jeweled dwellings made of sandalwood\
 and numerous wonderful articles of bedding,\
 offering them to the Buddha and his monks;\
 immaculate gardens and groves\
 where flowers and fruit abound,\
 flowing springs and bathing pools,\
 offering them to the Buddha and his monks;\
 offerings of this kind,\
 or many different wonderful varieties\
 presented gladly and without regret\
 as they seek the unsurpassed way.\
 Or there are bodhisattvas\
 who expound the Law of tranquil extinction,\
 giving different types of instruction\
 to numberless living beings.\
 Or I see bodhisattvas\
 viewing the nature of all phenomena\
 as having no dual characteristics,\
 as being like empty space.\
 And I see Buddha sons\
 whose minds have no attachments,\
 who use this wonderful wisdom\
 to seek the unsurpassed way. \
 \
 Manjushri,\
 there are also bodhisattvas\
 who after the Buddha has passed into extinction\
 make offerings to his relics.\
 I see Buddha sons\
 building memorial towers\
 as numberless as Ganges sands,\
 ornamenting each land with them,\
 jeweled towers lofty and wonderful,\
 five thousand yojanas high,\
 their width and depth\
 exactly two thousand yojanas,\
 each of these memorial towers\
 with its thousand banners and streamers,\
 with curtains laced with gems like dewdrops\
 and jeweled bells chiming harmoniously.\
 There heavenly beings, dragons, spirits,\
 human and nonhuman beings,\
 with incense, flowers and music\
 constantly making offerings.\
 Manjushri,\
 these Buddha sons\
 in order to make offerings to the relics\
 adorn the memorial towers\
 so that each land, just as it is,\
 is as outstandingly wonderful and lovely\
 as the heavenly king of trees\
 when its flowers open and unfold.\
 When the Buddha emits a beam of light\
 I and the other members of the assembly\
 can see these lands\
 in all their various outstanding wonders.\
 The supernatural powers of the Buddhas\
 and their wisdom are rare indeed;\
 by emitting one pure beam of light,\
 the Buddhas illuminate countless lands.\
 I and the others have seen this,\
 have gained something never known before.\
 Buddha son, Manjushri,\
 I beg you to settle the doubts of the assembly.\
 The four kinds of believers look up in happy anticipation,\
 gazing at you and me.\
 Why does the World-Honored One\
 emit this beam of brightness?\
 Buddha son, give a timely answer,\
 settle these doubts and occasion joy!\
 What rich benefits will come\
 from the projecting of this beam of brightness?\
 It must be that the Buddha wishes to expound\
 the wonderful Law he gained\
 when he sat in the place of practice.\
 He must have prophecies to bestow.\
 He has showed us Buddha lands\
 with their adornment and purity of manifold treasures,\
 and we have seen their Buddhas -\
 this is not done for petty reasons.\
 Manjushri, you must know.\
 The four kinds of believers, the dragons and spirits\
 gaze at you in surmise,\
 wondering what explanation you will give.\
 \
 At that time Manjushri said to the bodhisattva and mahasattva Maitreya
and the other great men: "Good men, I suppose that the Buddha, the World
Honored One, wishes now to expound the great Law, to rain down the rain
of the great Law, to blow the conch of the great Law, to beat the drum
of the great Law, to elucidate the meaning of the great Law. Good men,
in the past I have seen this auspicious portent among the Buddhas. They
emitted a beam of light like this, and after that they expounded the
great Law. Therefore we should know that now, when the present Buddha
manifests this light, we will do likewise. He wishes to cause all living
beings to hear and understand the Law, which is difficult for all the
world to believe. Therefore he has manifested this auspicious portent. \
 \
 "Good men, once, at a time that was an immeasurable, boundless,
inconceivable number of asamkhya kalpas in the past, there was a Buddha
named Sun Moon Bright, Thus Come One, worthy of offerings, of right and
universal knowledge, perfect clarity and conduct, well gone,
understanding the world, unexcelled worthy, trainer of people, teacher
of heavenly and human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One, who expounded
the correct Law. His exposition was good at the beginning, good in the
middle, good at the end. The meaning was profound and far-reaching, the
words were skillful and wondrous. It was pure and without alloy,
complete, clean and spotless, and bore the marks of Brahma practice."\
 \
 "For the sake of those seeking to become voice-hearers he responded by
expounding the Law of the four noble truths, so that they could
transcend birth, old age, sickness and death and attain nirvana. For the
sake of those seeking to become pratyekabuddhas he responded by
expounding the Law of the twelve-linked chain of causation. For the sake
of the bodhisattvas he responded by expounding the six paramitas,
causing them to gain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi and to acquire the wisdom
that embraces all species."\
 \
 "Then there was another Buddha who was also named Sun Moon Bright, and
then another Buddha also named Sun Moon Bright. There were twenty
thousand Buddhas like this, all with the same appellation, all named Sun
Moon Bright. And all had the same surname, the surname Bharadvaja.
Maitreya, you should understand that from the first Buddha to the last,
all had the same appellation, all were named Sun Moon Bright. They were
worthy of all the ten epithets and the Law they expounded was good at
the beginning, in the middle, and at the end."\
 \
 "The last Buddha, when he had not yet left family life, had eight
princely sons. The first was named Having Intention, the second Good
Intention, the third Immeasurable intention, the fourth jeweled
intention, the fifth Increased Intention, the sixth Cleansed of Doubt
Intention, the seventh Echoing Intention, and the eighth Law Intention.
Dignity and virtue came easily to them, and each presided over a
four-continent realm."\
 \
 "When these princes heard that their father had left family life and
had gained anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, they all cast aside their princely
positions and followed him by leaving family life. Conceiving a desire
for the Great Vehicle, the constantly carried out Brahma practices, and
all became teachers of the Law. They had already planted good roots in
the company of a thousand, ten thousand Buddhas."\
 \
 "At that time the Buddha Sun Moon Bright preached the Great Vehicle
sutra entitled Immeasurable Meanings, a Law to instruct the
Bodhisattvas, one that is guarded and kept in mind by the Buddhas. When
he had finished preaching the sutra, he sat cross-legged in the midst of
the great assembly and entered into the samadhi of the place of
immeasurable meanings, his body and mind never moving. At this time
heaven rained down mandarava flowers, great mandarava flowers,
manjushaka flowers, and great manjushaka flowers, scattering them over
the Buddha and the great assembly, and everywhere the Buddha world
quaked and trembled in six different ways."\
 \
 "At that time the monks, nuns, laymen and laywomen , heavenly beings,
dragons, yakshas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, and mahoragas,
the human and nonhuman beings in the assembly, as well as the petty
kings and wheel-turning sage kings - all those in this great assembly
gained what they had never had before and, filled with joy, pressed
their palms together and gazed at the Buddha with a single mind. \
 \
 "At that time the Thus Come One emitted a ray of light from the tuft of
white hair between his eyebrows, one of his characteristic features,
lighting up eighteen thousand Buddha lands in the eastern direction.
There was no place that the light did not penetrate, just as you have
seen it light up these Buddha lands now."\
 \
 "Maitreya, you should understand this. At that time in the assembly
there were twenty million bodhisattvas who were happy and eager to hear
the Law. When these bodhisattvas saw this beam of light that illuminated
the Buddha lands everywhere, they gained what they had never had before.
They wished to know the causes and conditions that had occasioned this
light."\
 \
 "At that time there was a bodhisattva named Wonderfully Bright who had
eight hundred disciples. At this time the Buddha Sun Moon Bright arose
from his samadhi and, because of the bodhisattva Wonderfully Bright,
preached the Great Vehicle sutra called the Lotus of the Wonderful Law,
a Law to instruct the bodhisattvas, one that is guarded and kept in mind
by the Buddhas. For sixty small kalpas the Buddha remained in his seat
without rising, and the listeners in the assembly at that time also
remained seated there for sixty small kalpas, their bodies and minds
never moving. And yet it seemed to them that they had been listening to
the Buddha peach for no more than the space of a meal. At this time in
the assembly there was not a single person who in body or mind had the
least feeling of weariness."\
 \
 "When the Buddha Sun Moon Bright had finished preaching this sutra over
a period of sixty small kalpas, he spoke these words to the Brahmas,
devils, shramanas and Brahmans, as well as to the heavenly and human
beings and asuras in the assembly, saying, 'tonight at midnight the Thus
Come One will enter the nirvana of no remainder."\
 \
 "At this time there was a bodhisattva named Virtue Storehouse. The
Buddha Sun Moon Bright bestowed a prophecy on him, announcing to the
monks, "This bodhisattva Virtue Storehouse will be the next to become a
Buddha. He will be called Pure Body, tathagata, arhat,
samyak-sambuddha."\
 \
 "After the Buddha had finished bestowing this prophecy, at midnight he
entered the nirvana of no remainder."\
 \
 "After the Buddha had passed away, Bodhisattva Wonderfully Bright
upheld the Sutra of the Lotus of the Wonderful Law, for a period of
fully eighty small kalpas expounding it for others. The eight sons of
the Buddha Sun Moon Bright all acknowledged Wonderfully Bright as their
teacher. Wonderfully Bright taught and converted them and roused in them
a firm determination to gain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Those princely
sons gave offerings to immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands,
millions of Buddhas, and after that all were able to achieve the Buddha
way. The last to become a Buddha was named Burning Torch." \
 \
 "Among the eight hundred disciples of Wonderfully Bright was one named
Seeker of Fame. He was greedy for gain and support, and though he read
and recited numerous sutras, he could not understand them, but for the
most part forgot them. Hence he was called Seeker of Fame. Because this
man had in addition planted various good roots, however, he was able to
encounter immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of
Buddhas, to make offerings to them, revere, honor and praise them."\
 \
 "Maitreya, you should understand this. Bodhisattva Wonderfully Bright
who lived then-could he be known to you? He was no other than I myself.
And Bodhisattva Seeker of Fame was you."\
 \
 "Now when I see this auspicious portent, it is no different from what I
saw before. Therefore I suppose that now the Thus Come One is about to
preach the Great Vehicle sutra called the Lotus of the Wonderful Law, a
Law to instruct the bodhisattvas, one that is guarded and kept in mind
by the Buddhas." \
 \
 At that time Manjushri, wishing in the presence of the great assembly
to state his meaning once more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 I recall that in a past age\
 immeasurable, innumerable kalpas ago\
 there was a Buddha, most honored of men,\
 named Sun Moon Bright.\
 This World-Honored One expounded the Law,\
 saving immeasurable living beings\
 and numberless millions of bodhisattvas,\
 causing them to enter the Buddha wisdom.\
 The eight princely sons whom this Buddha sired\
 before taking leave of family life,\
 when they saw that the great sage had left his family\
 did likewise, carrying out brahma practices.\
 At that time the Buddha preached the Great Vehicle,\
 a sutra named Immeasurable Meanings,\
 and in the midst of a great assembly\
 for the sake of the people established broad distinctions.\
 When the Buddha had finished preaching this sutra\
 he sat in the seat of the Law,\
 sitting cross-legged in the samadhi\
 called the place of immeasurable meanings.\
 The heavens rained mandarava flowers,\
 heavenly drums sounded of themselves,\
 and the heavenly beings, dragons and spirits\
 made offerings to the most honored of men.\
 All the Buddha lands\
 immediately quaked and trembled greatly.\
 The Buddha emitted a light from between his eyebrows,\
 manifesting signs that are rarely seen.\
 This light illumined the eastern direction,\
 eighteen thousand Buddha lands,\
 showing how all the living beings there\
 were recompensed in birth and death for their past deed.\
 That one could see how these Buddha lands,\
 adorned with numerous jewels,\
 shone with hues of lapis lazuli and crystal\
 was due to the illumination of the Buddha's light.\
 One could also see the heavenly and human beings,\
 dragons, spirits, many yakshas,\
 gandharvas and kimnaras,\
 each making offerings to his respective Buddha.\
 One could also see Thus Come Ones\
 naturally attaining the Buddha way,\
 their bodies the color of golden mountains,\
 upright, imposing, very subtle and wonderful.\
 It was as though in the midst of pure lapis lazuli\
 there should appear statues of real gold.\
 In the midst of the great assembly the World-Honored Ones\
 expounded the principles of the profound Law.\
 In one after another of the Buddha lands\
 the voice-hearers in countless multitudes\
 through the illumination of the Buddha's light\
 all became visible with their great assemblies.\
 There were also monks\
 residing in the midst of forests,\
 exerting themselves and keeping the pure precepts\
 as though they were guarding a bright jewel.\
 One could also see bodhisattvas\
 carrying out almsgiving, forbearances, and so forth,\
 their number like Ganges sands,\
 due to the illumination of the Buddha's light.\
 One could also see bodhisattvas\
 entering deep into meditation practices,\
 their bodies and minds still and unmoving,\
 in that manner seeking the unsurpassed way.\
 One could also see bodhisattvas\
 who knew that phenomena are marked by tranquility and extinction,\
 each in his respective land\
 preaching the Law and seeking the Buddha way.\
 At that time the four kinds of believers\
 seeing the Buddha Sun Moon Bright\
 manifest his great transcendental powers,\
 all rejoiced in their hearts,\
 and each one asked his neighbor\
 what had caused these events.\
 The one honored by heavenly and human beings\
 just then arose from his samadhi\
 and praised Bodhisattva Wonderfully Bright, saying,\
 "You are the eyes of the world,\
 one whom all can take faith in and believe,\
 able to honor and uphold the storehouse of the Dharma.\
 The law that I preach-\
 you alone know how to testify to it."\
 The World-Honored One, having bestowed this praise,\
 causing Wonderfully Bright to rejoice,\
 preached the Lotus Sutra\
 for fully sixty small kalpas.\
 He never rose from this seat,\
 and the supreme and wonderful Law that he preached\
 was accepted and upheld in its entirety\
 by the Dharma teacher Wonderfully Bright.\
 After the Buddha had preached the Lotus,\
 causing all the assembly to rejoice,\
 on that very same day\
 he announced to the assembly of heavenly and human beings,\
 "I have already expounded for you\
 the meaning of the true entity of all phenomena.\
 Now when midnight comes\
 I will enter nirvana.\
 You must strive with all your hearts\
 and remove yourselves from indulgence and laxity,\
 it is very difficult to encounter a Buddha-\
 you meet one once in a million kalpas."\
 When the children of the World-Honored One\
 heard that the Buddha was to enter nirvana,\
 each one was filled with sorrow and distress,\
 wondering why the Buddha should so quickly seek extinction.\
 The sage lord, king of the Law,\
 comforted and reassured the countless multitude,\
 saying, "When I enter extinction\
 you must not be concerned or fearful!\
 This bodhisattva Virtue Storehouse\
 has already fully understood in his mind\
 the true entity that is without outflows.\
 He will be next to become a Buddha,\
 bearing the name Pure Body,\
 and he too will save immeasurable multitudes."\
 That night the Buddha entered extinction,\
 as a fire dies out when the firewood is exhausted.\
 They divided and apportioned his relics\
 and built immeasurable numbers of towers,\
 and the monks and nuns\
 whose number was like Ganges sands\
 redoubled their exertions,\
 thereby seeking the unsurpassed way.\
 This Dharma teacher Wonderfully Bright\
 honored and upheld the Buddha's storehouse of the Dharma\
 throughout eighty small kalpas,\
 broadly propagating the Lotus Sutra.\
 These eight princely sons\
 whom Wonderfully Bright converted\
 held firmly to the unsurpassed way\
 and were thus able to encounter innumerable Buddhas.\
 And after they had made offerings to these Buddhas\
 they followed them in practicing the great way\
 and one after the other succeeded in becoming a Buddha,\
 each in turn bestowing a prophecy on his successor.\
 The last to become a heavenly being among heavenly beings\
 was named the Buddha Burning Torch.\
 As leader and teacher of seers\
 he saved immeasurable multitudes.\
 This Dharma teacher Wonderfully Bright\
 at that time had a disciple\
 whose mind was forever occupied with laziness and sloth,\
 who was greedy for fame and profit.\
 He sought fame and profit insatiably,\
 often amusing himself among clansmen and those of other surnames.\
 He threw away what he had studied and memorized,\
 neglected and forgot it, failed to understand it.\
 Because of this\
 he was named Seeker of Fame.\
 But he had also carried out many good actions\
 and thus was able to meet with innumerable Buddhas.\
 He made offerings to the Buddhas\
 and followed them in practicing the great way,\
 carrying out all the six paramitas,\
 and now he has met the lion of the Shakyas.\
 Hereafter he will become a Buddha\
 whose name will be Maitreya,\
 who will save living beings extensively\
 in numbers beyond calculation.\
 After that Buddha passed into extinction,\
 that lazy and slothful one-he was you,\
 and the Dharma teacher Wonderfully Bright-\
 that was the person who is now I myself.\
 I saw how the Buddha Torch Bright (Sun Moon Bright)\
 earlier manifested an auspicious portent like this.\
 And so I know that now this present Buddha\
 is about to preach the Lotus Sutra.\
 The signs now are like those of the earlier auspicious portent,\
 this is an expedient means used by the Buddhas.\
 Now when the Buddha emits this beam of brightness\
 he is helping to reveal the meaning of the true entity of\
 phenomena.\
 Human beings now will come to know it.\
 Let us press our palms together and wait with a single mind.\
 The Buddha will rain down the rain of the Law\
 to fully satisfy all seekers of the way.\
 You who seek the three vehicles,\
 if you have doubts and regrets,\
 the Buddha will resolve them for you,\
 bringing them to an end so that nothing remains.
