---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 12:10:04'
layout: page
slug: chapter-twenty-eight-the-encouragement-of-bodhisattva-universally-worthy
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Twenty-eight: The Encouragement of Bodhisattva Universally Worthy'
wordpress_id: '3612'
---

At that time Bodhisattva Universal worthy, famed for his freely
exercised transcendental powers, dignity and virtue, in company with
great bodhisattvas in immeasurable, boundless, indescribable numbers,
arrived from the east. The lands that he passed through one and all
quaked and trembled, jeweled lotus flowers rained down, and immeasurable
hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of different kinds of music
played. In addition, numberless heavenly beings, dragons yakshas,
gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoragas, human and nonhuman
beings surrounded him in a great assembly, each displaying his dignity,
virtue, and transcendental powers.\
 \
 When [Bodhisattva Universal Worthy] arrived in the midst of Mount
Gridhrakuta in the saha world, he bowed his head to the ground in
obeisance to Shakyamuni Buddha, circled around him to the right seven
times, and said to the Buddha: 'World-Honored One, when I was in the
land of the Buddha King Above Jeweled Dignity and Virtue, from far away
I heard the Lotus Sutra being preached in this saha world. In company
with this multitude of immeasurable, boundless hundreds, thousands, ten
thousands, millions of bodhisattvas I have come to listen to and accept
it. I beg that the World-Honored One will preach it for us. And good men
and good women in the time after the Thus Come One has entered
extinction--how will they be able to acquire this Lotus Sutra?"\
 \
 The Buddha said to Bodhisattva Universal Worthy: "If good men and good
women will fulfill four conditions in the time after the Thus Come One
has entered extinction, then they will be able to acquire this Lotus
Sutra. First, they must be protected and kept in mind by the Buddhas.
Second, they must plant the roots of virtue. Third, they must enter the
stage where they are sure of reaching enlightenment. Fourth, they must
conceive a determination to save all living beings. If good men and good
women fulfill these four conditions, then after the Thus Come One has
entered extinction they will be certain to acquire this sutra."\
 \
 At that time Bodhisattva Universal Worthy said to the Buddha:
"World-Honored One , in the evil and corrupt age of the last
five-hundred-year period, if there is someone who accepts and upholds
this sutra, I will guard and protect him, free him from decline and
harm, see that he attains peace and tranquility, and make certain that
no one can spy out and take advantage of his shortcomings, no devil,
devil's son, devil's daughter, devil's minion, or one possessed by the
devil, no yaksha, rakshasa, kumdhanda, pishacha, kritya, putana, vetada,
or other being that torments humans will be able to take advantage of
him.\
 \
 "Whether that person is walking or standing, if he reads and recites
this sutra, then at that time I will mount my six-tusked kingly white
elephant and with my multitude of great bodhisattvas will proceed to
where he is. I will manifest myself, offer alms, guard and protect him,
and bring comfort to his mind. I will do this because I too want to
offer alms to the Lotus Sutra. If when that person is seated he ponders
this sutra, at that time too I will mount my kingly white elephant and
manifest myself in his presence. If that person should forget a single
phrase or verse of the Lotus Sutra, I will prompt him and join him in
reading and reciting so that he will gain understanding. At that time
the person who accepts, upholds, reads and recites the Lotus Sutra will
be able to see my body, will be filled with great joy, and will apply
himself with greater diligence than ever. Because he has seen me, he
will immediately acquire samadhis and dharanis. These are called the
repetition dharani, the hundred, thousand, ten thousand, million
repetition dharani, and the Dharma sound expedient dharani. He will
acquire dharanis such as these.\
 \
 "World-Honored One, in that later time, in the evil and corrupt age of
the last five-hundred-year period, if monks, nuns, laymen believers or
laywomen believers who seek out, accept, uphold, read, recite, and
transcribe this Lotus Sutra should wish to practice it, they should do
so diligently and with a single mind for a period of twenty-one days.
When the twenty-one days have been fulfilled, I will mount my six-tusked
white elephant and, with immeasurable numbers of bodhisattvas
surrounding me and with this body that all living beings delight to see,
I will manifest myself in the presence of the person and preach the Law
for him, bringing him instruction, benefit, and joy. I will also give
him dharani spells. And because he has acquired these spells, no
nonhuman being will be able to injure him and he cannot be confused or
lead astray by women. I too will personally guard him at all times.
Therefore, World-Honored One, I hope you will permit me to pronounce
these dharanis." Then in the presence of the Buddha he pronounced these
spells:\
 \
 adande dandapati dandavarte dandakushale dandasudhare\
 sudhare sudharapati buddhapashyane sarvadharani-avartani\
 sarvandhashyavartani su-avartani samghaparikshani\
 samghanarghatani asamge samgapagate tri-adhvasamgatulya-\
 arate-prapty savasamgasamatikrante sarvadharmasuparikshite\
 sarvasattvarutakaushalyanugate simhavikridite\
 \
 "World-Honored One, if any bodhisattva is able to hear these dharanis,
he should understand that it is due to the transcendental powers of
Universal Worthy. If when the Lotus Sutra is propagated throughout
Jambudvipa there are those who accept and uphold it, they should think
to themselves: This is all due to the authority and supernatural power
of Universal Worthy! If there are those who accept this sutra, memorize
it correctly, understand its principles, and practice it as the sutra
prescribes, these persons should know that they are carrying out the
practices of Universal Worthy himself. In the presence of immeasurable,
boundless members of Buddhas they will have planted good roots deep in
the ground, and the hands of the Thus Come Ones will pat them on the
head.\
 \
 "If they do no more than copy the sutra, when their lives come to an
end they will be reborn in the Trayastrimsha heaven. At that time
eighty-four thousand heavenly women, performing all kinds of music, will
come to greet them. Such persons will put on crowns made of seven
treasures amidst the ladies-in-waiting will amuse and enjoy themselves.
How much more so, then, if they accept, uphold, read and recite the
sutra, memorize it correctly, understand its principles, when the lives
of these persons come to an end, they will be received into the hands of
a thousand Buddhas, who will free them from all fear and keep them from
falling into the evil paths of existence. Immediately they will proceed
to the Tushita heaven, to the place of Bodhisattva Maitreya. Bodhisattva
Maitreya possesses the thirty-two features and is surrounded by a
multitude of great bodhisattvas. He has hundreds, thousands, ten
thousands, millions of heavenly women attendants, and these persons will
be reborn in their midst. Such will be the benefits and advantages they
enjoy.\
 \
 "Therefore persons of wisdom should single-mindedly copy the sutra
themselves, or cause others to copy it, should accept, uphold, read, and
recite it, memorize it correctly and practice it as the sutra
prescribes. "World-Honored One, I now therefore employ my transcendental
powers to guard and protect this sutra. And after the Thus Come One had
entered extinction, I will cause it to be widely propagated throughout
Jambudvipa and will see that it never comes to an end."\
 \
 At that time Shakyamuni Buddha spoke these words of praise: "Excellent,
excellent, Universal Worthy! You are able to guard and assist this sutra
and cause many living beings to gain peace and happiness and advantages.
You have already acquired inconceivable benefits and profound great pity
and compassion. Since long ages in the past you have shown a desire for
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, and have taken a vow to use your
transcendental powers to guard and protect this sutra. And I will employ
my transcendental powers to guard and protect those who can accept and
uphold the name of Bodhisattva Universal Worthy.\
 \
 "Universal Worthy, if there are those who accept, uphold, read and
recite this Lotus Sutra, memorize it correctly, practice and transcribe
it, you should know that such persons have seen Shakyamuni Buddha. It is
as though they heard his sutra from the Buddha's mouth. You should know
that such persons have offered alms to Shakyamuni Buddha you should know
that such persons have been patted on the head by Shakyamuni Buddha. You
should know that such persons have been covered in the robes of
Shakyamuni Buddha.\
 \
 "They will no longer be greedy for or attached to worldly pleasures,
they will have no taste for the scriptures or jottings of the
non-Buddhists. They will take no pleasure in associating this such
people, or with those engaged in evil occupations such as butchers,
raisers of pigs sheep, chickens or dogs, hunters, or those who offer
women's charms for sale. These persons will be honest and upright in
mind and intent, correct in memory, and will possess the power of merit
and virtue. They will not be troubled by the three poisons, nor will
they be troubled by jealousy, self-importance, ill-founded conceit, or
arrogance. These persons will have few desires, will be easily
satisfied, and will know how to carry out the practices of Universal
Worthy.\
 \
 "Universal Worthy, after the Thus Come One has entered extinction, in
the last five-hundred-year period, if you see someone who accepts,
upholds reads, and recites the Lotus Sutra, you should think to
yourself: Before long this person will proceed to the place of practice,
conquer the devil hosts, and attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. He will
turn the wheel of the Dharma, beat the Dharma drum, and sound the Dharma
conch, and rain down the Dharma rain. He is worthy to sit in the lion
seat of the Dharma, amid the great assembly of heavenly and human
beings.\
 \
 "Universal Worthy, in later ages if there are those who accept, uphold,
read, and recite this sutra, such persons will no longer be greedy for
or attached to clothing, bedding, food and drink, or other necessities
of daily life. Their wishes will not be in vain, and in this present
existence they will gain the reward of good fortune. If there is anyone
who disparages or makes light of them, saying, 'You are mere idiots! It
is useless to carry out these practices--in the end they will gain you
nothing!, then as punishment for his offense that person will be born
eyeless in existence after existence. But if there is anyone who offers
alms to them and praises them, then in this present existence he will
have manifest reward for it.\
 \
 "If anyone sees a person who accepts and upholds this sutra and tries
to expose the faults or evils of that person, whether what he speaks is
true or not, he will in his present existence be afflicted with white
leprosy. If anyone disparages or laughs at that person, then in
existence after existence he will have teeth that are missing or spaced
far apart, ugly lips, a flat nose, hands and feet that are gnarled or
deformed, and eyes that are squinty. His body will have a foul odor,
with evil sores that run pus and blood, and he will suffer from water in
the belly, shortness of breath, and other severe and malignant
illnesses. Therefore, Universal Worthy, if you see a person who accepts
and upholds this sutra, you should rise and greet him from afar, showing
him the same respect you would a Buddha."\
 \
 When this chapter on the Encouragements of the Bodhisattva Universal
Worthy was preached, bodhisattvas immeasurable and boundless as Ganges
sands acquired dharanis allowing them to memorize a hundred, a thousand,
ten thousand, a million repetitions of the teachings, and bodhisattvas
equal to the dust particles of the thousand-million-fold world perfected
the way of Universal Worthy.\
 \
 When the Buddha preached this sutra, Universal Worthy and the other
bodhisattvas, Shariputra and the other voice-hearers, along with the
heavenly beings, dragons, humans and nonhuman beings--the entire
membership of the great assembly were all filled with great joy.
Accepting and upholding the words of the Buddha, they bowed in obeisance
and departed.
