---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:58:14'
layout: page
slug: chapter-fourteen-peaceful-practices
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Fourteen: Peaceful Practices'
wordpress_id: '3584'
---

At that time Manjushri, Dharma prince, bodhisattva and mahasattva, said
to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, these bodhisattvas undertake
something that is very difficult. Because they revere and obey the
Buddha, they have taken a great vow that in the evil age hereafter they
will guard, uphold, read, recite and preach this Lotus Sutra.
World-Honored One, in the evil age hereafter, how should these
bodhisattvas, mahasattvas go about preaching this sutra?"\
 \
 The Buddha said to Manjushri: "If these bodhisattvas and mahasattvas in
the evil age hereafter wish to preach this sutra they should abide by
four rules. First they should abide by the practices and associations
proper for bodhisattvas so that they can expound this sutra for the sake
of living beings. Manjushri, what do I mean by the practices of a
bodhisattva or mahasattva? If a bodhisattva or mahasattva takes his
stand on perseverance, is gentle and compliant, never violent, and never
alarmed in mind; and if with regard to phenomena he takes no action but
observes the true entiry of phenomena without acting or making any
distinction, then this one might call the practices of a bodhisattva and
mahasattva. \
 \
 "As for the associations proper for them, bodhisattvas and mahasattvas
should not associate closely with rulers, princes, high ministers or
heads of offices. They should not associate closely with non-Buddhists,
Brahmans or Jains, or with those who compose works of secular literature
or books extolling the heretics, nor should they be closely associated
with Lokayatas or anti-Lokayatas 4. They should not be closely
associated with hazardous amusement, boxing or wrestling, or with actors
or others engaging in various kinds of illusionary entertainment, or
with the chandalas, persons engaging in raising pigs, engaged in raising
pigs, sheep, chickens or dogs, or those who engage in hunting or fishing
or other evil activities. If such persons at times come to one, then one
may preach the Law for them, but one should expect nothing from it.
Again one should not associate with monks, nuns, laymen or laywomen who
seek to become voice-hearers, nor should one question or visit them. One
should not stay with them in the same room, or in the place where one
exercises, or in the lecture hall. One should not join them in their
activities. If at times they come to one, one should preach the Law in
accordance with what is appropriate, but should expect nothing from it.
\
 \
 "Manjushri, the bodhisattva or mahasattva should not, when preaching
the Law to women, do so in a manner that could arouse thoughts of desire
in them, nor should he delight in seeing them. If he enters the house of
another person, he should not engage in talk with the young girls,
unmarried women or widows. Nor should he go near the five types of
unmanly men or have any close dealings with them 5. He should not enter
another person's house alone. If for some reason it is imperative to
enter alone, he should concentrate his full mind on thoughts of the
Buddha. If he should preach the Law for a woman, he should not bear his
teeth in laughter or let his chest become exposed. He should not have
any intimate dealings with her even for the sake of the Law, much less
for any other purpose. \
 \
 "He should not delight in nurturing underage disciples, shramaneras or
children, and should not delight in sharing the same teacher with them.
He should constantly take pleasure in sitting in meditation, being in
quiet surroundings and learning to still his mind. Manjushri, these are
what I call the things he should first of all associate himself with. \
 \
 "Next, the bodhisattva or mahasattva should view all phenomena as
empty, that being their true entity. They do not turn upside down, do
not move, do not regress, do not revolve. They are like empty space,
without innate nature, beyond the reach of all words. They are not born,
do not emerge, do not arise. They are without name, without form,
without true being. They are without volume, without limits, without
hindrance, without barriers. It is only through causes and conditions
that they exist, and come to be taken upside down, to be born. Therefore
I say that one should constantly delight in viewing the form of
phenomena as this. This is what I call the second thing that the
bodhisattva or mahasattva should associate himself with." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 If there are bodhisattvas\
 who in the evil age hereafter\
 wish with fearless hearts\
 to preach this sutra,\
 these are the places they should enter\
 and the persons they should closely associate with.\
 At all times shun rulers\
 and the princes of kingdoms,\
 high ministers, heads of offices,\
 those engaged in hazardous amusements\
 as well as chandalas,\
 non-Buddhists and Brahmans.\
 One should not associate\
 with persons of overbearing arrogance\
 or those who stubbornly adhere to the Lesser Vehicle\
 and are learned in its three storehouses.\
 Monks who violate the precepts,\
 arhats who are so in name only,\
 nuns who are fond\
 of jesting and laughter,\
 or women lay believers\
 who are profoundly attached to the five desires\
 or who seek immediate entry into extinction -\
 all these one should not associate with.\
 If there are persons\
 who come with good hearts\
 to the place of the bodhisattva\
 in order to hear the Buddha way,\
 then the bodhisattva\
 with a fearless heart\
 but without harboring expectations\
 should preach the Law for them.\
 But widows and unmarried women\
 and the different kinds of unmanly men -\
 all these he should not associate with\
 or treat with intimacy.\
 Also he must not associate with\
 slaughterers or flesh-carvers,\
 those who hunt animals or catch fish,\
 or kill to do harm for profit.\
 Those who peddle meat for a living\
 or display women and sell their favors -\
 all persons such as this\
 one should never associate with.\
 Those engaged in hazardous sports,\
 wrestling, or other kinds of amusements,\
 women of lascivious nature -\
 never associate with any of these.\
 Never go alone into an enclosed place\
 to preach the Law to a woman.\
 When you preach the Law,\
 let there be no jesting or laughter.\
 When you enter a village to beg for food,\
 take another monk with you;\
 if there is no other monk around,\
 with a single mind concentrate on the Buddha.\
 These are what I call\
 proper practices and associations.\
 By being careful about these two,\
 one can preach in a peaceful manner.\
 One should not speak in terms of\
 superior medial or inferior doctrines,\
 of doctrines of the conditioned or unconditioned,\
 or the real or the not real.\
 Again one should not make distinctions\
 by saying "This is a man," "This is a woman."\
 Do not try to apprehend phenomena,\
 to understand or to see them.\
 These are what I call\
 the practices of the bodhisattva.\
 All phenomena\
 are empty, without being,\
 without any constant abiding,\
 without arising or extinction.\
 This I call the position\
 the wise person associates himself with.\
 From upside-down-ness come distinctions,\
 that phenomena exist, do not exist,\
 are real, or not real,\
 are born, are not born.\
 Place yourself in quiet surroundings,\
 learn to still your mind,\
 remain tranquil, and moving,\
 like Mount Sumeru.\
 Look upon all phenomena\
 as having no existence,\
 like empty space,\
 as without firmness or hardness,\
 not born, not emerging,\
 not moving, and regressing,\
 constantly abiding in a single form -\
 this I call the place to draw near to.\
 If after I have entered extinction\
 there are monks\
 who take up these practices\
 and these associations,\
 then when they preach this sutra\
 they will be free of quailing and timidity.\
 If a bodhisattva will at times\
 enter a quiet room\
 and with the correct mental attitude\
 will view phenomena according to the doctrine,\
 and then, rising from his meditation,\
 will for the sake of the ruler,\
 the princes, ministers and people,\
 the Brahmans and others,\
 unfold, propagate, expound\
 and preach this sutra,\
 then his mind will be tranquil,\
 free of quailing and timidity.\
 Manjushri,\
 these I call the first set of rules\
 for the bodhisattva to abide by\
 to enable him in later ages\
 to preach the Lotus Sutra.\
 \
 "Furthermore, Manjushri, after the Thus Come One has passed into
extinction, in the Latter Day of the Law, if one wishes to preach this
sutra, you should abide by these peaceful practices. When he opens his
mouth to expound or when he reads the sutra, he should not delight in
speaking of the faults of other people or scriptures. He should not
display contempt for other teachers of the Law or speak of other
people's tastes or shortcomings. With regard to the voice-hearers he
should not refer to them by name and describe their faults, or name them
and praise their good points. Also he should not allow his mind to
become filled with resentment or hatred. Because he is good at
cultivating this kind of peaceful mind, his listeners will not oppose
his ideas. If he is asked difficult questions, he should not reply in
terms of the Law of a Lesser Vehicle. He should explain things solely in
terms of the Great Vehicle so that people will be able to acquire wisdom
embracing all species." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 The bodhisattva should at all times delight\
 in preaching the Law in a tranquil manner.\
 On pure and clean ground\
 he should spread his sitting mat,\
 anoint his body with oil,\
 wash away dust and impurities,\
 put on a new clean robe\
 and make himself both inwardly and outwardly pure.\
 Seating himself comfortably in the Dharma seat,\
 he should preach the Law in accordance with questions.\
 If there are monks\
 or nuns,\
 men lay believers,\
 women lay believers,\
 rulers and princes,\
 officials, gentlemen and common people,\
 with a mild expression he should preach for them\
 the subtle and wonderful doctrines.\
 If there are difficult questions\
 he should answer them in accordance with the doctrines,\
 employing causes and conditions, similes and parables\
 to expound and make distinctions,\
 and through these expedient means\
 cause all listeners to aspire to enlightenment,\
 to increase their benefits little by little\
 and enter the Buddha way.\
 He should put aside all ideas of laziness,\
 all thought of negligence or ease,\
 remove himself from cares and worries\
 and with a compassionate mind preach the Law.\
 Day and night constantly he should expound\
 the teachings of the unsurpassed way,\
 employing causes and conditions,\
 immeasurable similes and parables\
 to instruct living beings\
 and cause them all to be joyful.\
 Clothing and bedding,\
 food, drink, medicine -\
 with regard to such things\
 he should have no expectations\
 but with a single mind concentrate\
 upon the reasons for preaching the Law,\
 desiring to complete the Buddha way\
 and to cause those in the assembly to do likewise.\
 That will bring great gain to them,\
 an offering of peace.\
 After I have passed into extinction\
 if there are monks\
 who are able to expound\
 this Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law\
 their minds will be free of the jealousy and anger,\
 of all worry and hindrance.\
 No one will trouble them,\
 curse or revile them.\
 They will know no fear,\
 no attacks by sword or staff,\
 nor will they ever be banished,\
 because they abide in patience.\
 Wise persons will be good\
 at cultivating their minds like this\
 and be able to abide in peace\
 as I have described above.\
 The blessings of such persons\
 are beyond calculation, simile or parable;\
 thousands, ten thousands, millions of kalpas\
 would not suffice to describe them.\
 \
 "Also, Manjushri, if a bodhisattva or mahasattva in the latter age
hereafter, when the Law is about to parish, should accept and embrace,
read and recite this sutra, he must not harbor a mind marked by
jealousy, fawning or deceit. And he must not be contemptuous of or
revile those who study the Buddha way or seek out their shortcomings. \
 \
 "If there are monks, nuns, laymen, or laywomen who seek to become
voice-hearers, seek to become pratyekabuddhas, or seek the bodhisattva
way, one must not trouble them by causing them to have doubts or
regrets, by saying to them, 'You are far removed from the way and in the
end will never be able to attain wisdom embracing all species. Why?
Because you are self-indulgent and willful people who are negligent of
the way!' \
 \
 "Also one should never engage in frivolous debate over the various
doctrines or dispute or wrangle over them. With regard to all living
beings one should think of them with great compassion. With regard to
the Thus Come Ones, think of them as kindly fathers; with regard to the
bodhisattvas, think of them as great teachers. Toward the great
bodhisattvas of the ten directions at all times maintain a serious mind,
paying them due reverence and obeisance. To all living beings preach the
Law and in an equitable manner. Because a person is heedful of the Law,
that does not mean one should vary the amount of preaching. Even to
those who show a profound love for the Law one should not on that
account preach at greater length. \
 \
 "Manjushri, if among these bodhisattvas and mahasattvas there are those
who in the latter age hereafter, when the Law is about to perish,
succeed in carrying out this third set of peaceful practices, then when
they preach this Law they will be free from anxiety and confusion, and
will find good fellow students to read and recite this sutra with. They
will attract a large assembly of persons who come to listen and assent.
After they have listened, they will embrace; after they have embraced,
they will recite; after they have recited, they will preach; and after
they have preached, they will copy, or will cause others to copy, and
will present offerings to the sutra rolls, treating them with reverence,
respect and praise." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 If you wish to preach this sutra,\
 you must set aside jealousy, hatred, arrogance,\
 a mind that is fawning, deceitful, false,\
 and constantly practice honest and upright conduct.\
 Do not look with contempt on others\
 or hold frivolous debates on the doctrine.\
 Do not cause others to have doubts or regrets\
 by saying, "You will never become a Buddha!"\
 When a son of the Buddha preaches the Law\
 he is at all times gentle and full of forbearance,\
 having pity and compassion on all,\
 never giving way to a negligent or a slothful mind.\
 The great bodhisattvas of the ten directions\
 out of pity for the multitude carry out the way.\
 One should strive to respect and read and revere them,\
 saying, "These are great teachers!"\
 Regarding the Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones,\
 learn to think of them as unsurpassed fathers.\
 Wipe out the mind of pride and arrogance\
 and preach the Law without hindrance.\
 Such is the third set of rules;\
 wise persons should guard and obey them.\
 If with a single mind they observe these peaceful practices,\
 they will be respected by immeasurable multitudes.\
 \
 "Manjushri, if among these bodhisattvas and mahasattvas there are those
who in the age hereafter, when the Law is about to perish, accept and
embrace the Lotus Sutra, toward the believers who are still in the
household or those who have left the household they should cultivate a
mind of great compassion, and toward those who are not bodhisattvas they
should also cultivate a mind of great compassion, and should think to
themselves: These persons have made a great error. Though the Thus Come
One as an expedient means preaches the Law in accordance with what is
appropriate, they do not listen, do not know, do not realize, do not
inquire, do not believe, do not understand. But although these persons
do not inquire about, do not believe and do not understand this sutra,
when I have attained anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, wherever I happen to be,
I will employ my transcendental powers and the power of wisdom to draw
them to me to cause them to abide in this Law. \
 \
 "Manjushri after the Thus Come One has entered extinction, if among
these bodhisattvas and mahasattvas there are those who will succeed in
carrying out this fourth set of rules, then when they preach the Law
they will commit no error. Monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, and rulers,
princes, great ministers, common people, Brahmans and householders will
constantly offer them alms and will revere, respect and praise them. The
heavenly beings in the sky, in order to listen to the Law, will
constantly follow and attend them. If they are in a settlement or town
or in a quiet and deserted place or a forest and people come and want to
ask them difficult questions, the heavenly beings day and night will for
the sake of the Law constantly guard and protect them and will cause all
the listeners to rejoice. Why? Because this sutra is protected by the
supernatural powers of all the Buddhas of the past, future, and present.
\
 \
 "Manjushri, as for this Lotus Sutra, throughout immeasurable numbers of
lands one cannot even hear its name, much less be able to see it, accept
and embrace, read and recite it. Manjushri, suppose, for example, that
there is a powerful wheel-turning sage king who wants to use his might
to subdue other countries, but the petty rulers will not heed his
commands. At that time the wheel-turning king calls up his various
troops and sets out to attack. If the king sees any of his fighting
forces who have won distinction in battle, he is greatly delighted and
immediately rewards the persons in accordance with their merits, handing
out fields, houses, settlements and towns, or robes and personal
adornments, or perhaps giving out various precious objects such as gold,
silver, lapis lazuli, seashell, agate, coral or amber, or elephants,
horses, carriages, men and women servants, and people. Only the bright
jewel that is in his topknot he does not give away. Why? Because this
one jewel exists only on the top of the King's head, and if he were to
give it away, his followers would be certain to express great
consternation and alarm. \
 \
 "Manjushri, the Thus Come One is like this. He uses the power of
meditation and wisdom to win Dharma lands and become king of the
threefold world. But the devil kings are unwilling to obey and submit.
The worthy and sage military leaders of the Thus Come One engage them in
battle, and when any of the Buddha's soldiers achieve distinction, the
Buddha is delighted in heart and in the midst of the four kinds of
believers he preaches various sutras, causing their hearts to be joyful.
He presents them with meditations, emancipations, roots and powers that
are free of outflows, and other treasures of the Law. He also presents
them with the city of nirvana, telling them that they have attained
extinction, guiding their minds and causing them all to rejoice. But he
does not preach the Lotus Sutra to them. \
 \
 "Manjushri, when the wheel-turning king sees someone among his soldiers
who has gained truly great distinction, he is so delighted in heart that
he takes the unbelievably fine jewel that has been in his topknot for so
long and has never been recklessly given away, and now gives it to this
man. And the Thus Come One does the same. In the threefold world he acts
as the great Dharma king. He uses the Law to teach and convert all
living beings, watches his worthy and sage armies as they battle with
the devils of the five components, the devils of earthly desires, and
the death devil. And when they have won great distinction and merit,
wiping out the three poisons, emerging from the threefold world, and
destroying the nets of the devils, at that time the Thus Come One is
filled with great joy. This Lotus Sutra is capable of causing all living
beings to attain comprehensive wisdom. It will face much hostility in
the world and be difficult to believe. It has not been practiced before,
but now I preach it. \
 \
 "Manjushri, this Lotus Sutra is foremost among all that is preached by
the Thus Come One. Among all that is preached it is the most profound.
And it is given at the very last, the way that profound ruler did when
he took the bright jewel he had guarded for so long and finally gave it
away. \
 \
 "Manjushri this Lotus Sutra is the secret storehouse of the Buddhas,
the Thus Come Ones. Among the sutras, it holds the highest place.
Through the long night I have guarded and protected it and have never
recklessly propagated it. But today for the first time I expound it for
your sake." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoken in verse form, saying: \
 \
 Constantly practice perseverance,\
 have pity on all beings,\
 and do your best to expound and preach\
 the sutra praised by the Buddha.\
 In the latter age hereafter\
 those who embrace this sutra should,\
 without regard to persons in the household, persons who have\
 left it,\
 or persons who are not bodhisattvas,\
 cultivate pity and compassion,\
 saying, "If they do not listen to\
 and do not believe this sutra\
 they will be committing a great error.\
 If I gain the bodhisattva way\
 I will employ expedient means\
 and preach this Law for them,\
 causing them to abide in it.\
 Suppose there is a powerful\
 wheel-turning king.\
 His soldiers have won merit in battle\
 and he rewards them with various articles,\
 elephants, horses, carriages,\
 adornments for their person,\
 fields and houses,\
 settlements and towns,\
 or gives them clothing,\
 various kinds of precious objects,\
 men and women servants, wealth and goods,\
 delightedly bestowing all these.\
 But if there is someone brave and stalwart\
 who can carry out difficult deeds,\
 the king will remove the bright jewel from his topknot\
 and present it to the man.\
 The Thus Come One is like this.\
 He acts as king of the doctrines,\
 possessing the great power of perseverance\
 and the precious storehouse of wisdom,\
 and with his great pity and compassion\
 he converts the age in accordance with the Law.\
 He sees all persons\
 as they undergo suffering and anxiety,\
 seeking to gain emancipation\
 battling with the devils,\
 and for the sake of the living beings\
 he preaches various doctrines,\
 employing great expedient means\
 and preaching these sutras.\
 And when he knows that living beings\
 have gained powers through them,\
 then at the very last for their sake\
 he preaches this Lotus Sutra,\
 like the king who unbinds his topknot\
 and gives away his bright jewel.\
 This sutra is to be honored\
 as highest among all sutras.\
 Constantly I guard and protect it,\
 and do not purposely reveal it.\
 But now the time is right\
 for me to preach it to you.\
 After I have entered extinction\
 if someone seeks the Buddha way\
 and hopes to be able in tranquility\
 to expound this sutra,\
 then he should associate himself closely\
 with the four rules described.\
 Anyone who reads this sutra\
 will at all times be free of worry and anxiety;\
 likewise he will be without illness or pain,\
 his expression fresh and bright.\
 He will not be born in poverty or want,\
 in humble or ugly circumstances.\
 Living beings will delight to see him\
 and look up to him as a worthy sage.\
 The young sons of heavenly beings\
 will wait on him and serve him.\
 Swords and staves will not touch him\
 and poison will have no power to harm him.\
 If people speak ill and revile him,\
 their mouths will be closed and stopped up.\
 He will stroll about without fear\
 like the lion king.\
 The brilliance of his wisdom\
 will be like the shining of the sun;\
 even in his dreams\
 he will see only wonderful things.\
 He will see the Thus Come Ones\
 seated in their lion seats\
 surrounded by multitudes of monks\
 and preaching the Law.\
 And he will see dragons, spirits,\
 asuras and others,\
 numerous as Ganges sands,\
 reverently pressing their palms together.\
 He will see himself there\
 and will preach the Law for them.\
 Again he will see Buddhas,\
 their bodies marked by a golden hue,\
 emitting immeasurable rays\
 that light up all things,\
 employing Brahma sounds\
 to expound the doctrines.\
 For the four kinds of believers\
 the Buddha will preach the unsurpassed Law,\
 and he will see himself among them\
 pressing his palms together and praising the Buddha.\
 He will hear the Law and delight\
 and will offer alms.\
 He will obtain dharanis\
 and proof of the wisdom without regression.\
 And when the Buddha knows that his mind\
 has entered deep into the Buddha way,\
 then he will give him a prophecy\
 that he will attain the highest, the correct enlightenment.\
 "You, good man,\
 in an age to come\
 will attain immeasurable wisdom,\
 the great way of the Buddha.\
 Your land will be adorned and pure,\
 incomparably broad and great,\
 with the four kinds of believers\
 who press their palms together and listen to the Law.\
 Again he will see himself\
 in the midst of mountains and forests\
 practicing the good Law,\
 understanding the true nature of all phenomena,\
 deeply entering meditation\
 and seeing the Buddhas of the ten directions.\
 Of Buddhas, their bodies of golden hue,\
 adorned with the marks of a hundred kinds of good fortune,\
 of listening to the Law and preaching it to the people -\
 such will be the good dreams he constantly dreams.\
 Again he will dream he is king of a country\
 but casts aside palaces and attendants\
 and the superb and wonderful objects of the five desires,\
 repairs to the place of practice\
 and under the bodhi tree\
 seats himself in a lion seat,\
 seeking the way, and after seven days\
 gains the wisdom of the Buddhas.\
 Having succeeded in the unsurpassed way,\
 he rises and turns the wheel of the Law,\
 preaching the Law for the four kinds of believers,\
 for thousands, ten thousands, millions of kalpas\
 preaching the wonderful Law free of outflows,\
 saving immeasurable living beings.\
 And afterward he will enter nirvana\
 like smoke coming to an end when a lamp goes out.\
 If in that evil age hereafter\
 someone preaches this foremost Law,\
 that person will gain great benefits,\
 blessings such as have been described above.
