---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:56:10'
layout: page
slug: chapter-twelve-devadatta
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Twelve: Devadatta'
wordpress_id: '3580'
---

At that time the Buddha addressed the bodhisattvas, the heavenly and
human beings, and the four kinds of believers saying: "Immeasurable
kalpas in the past, I sought the Lotus Sutra without ever flagging.
During those many kalpas, I constantly appeared as the ruler of a
kingdom who made a vow to seek the unsurpassed bodhi. His mind never
wavered or turned aside, and in his desire to fulfill the six paramitas
he diligently distributed alms, never stinting in heart, whether the
gift was elephants or horses, the seven rare articles, countries,
cities, wife, children, maidservants, or his own head, eyes, marrow and
brain, his own flesh and limbs. He did not begrudge even his own being
and life. At that period the human life span was immeasurably long. But
for the sake of the Law this king abandoned his kingdom and throne,
delegated the government to the crown prince, sounded drums and sent out
proclamations, seeking the Law in four directions and saying, 'Who can
expound the Great Vehicle for me? To the end of my life I will be his
provider and servant!'\
 \
 "At that time there was a seer who came to the king and said, "I have a
Great Vehicle text called the Sutra of the Wonderful Law. If you will
never disobey me, I will expound it for you.'\
 \
 "When the king heard these words of the seer, he danced for joy. At
once he accompanied the seer, providing him with whatever he needed,
picking fruit, drawing water, gathering firewood, setting out meals,
even offering his own body as a couch and seat, never stinting in body
or mind. He served the seer in this manner for a thousand years, all for
the sake of the Law, working diligently acting as a provider and seeing
to it that the seer lacked for nothing."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 I recall those departed kalpas of the past\
 when in order to seek the great Law,\
 though I was the ruler of a worldly kingdom,\
 I was not greedy to satisfy the five desires\
 but instead struck the bell, crying in four quarters,\
 "Who possesses the great Law?\
 If he will explain and preach it for me\
 I will be his slave and servant!"\
 At that time there was a seer named Asita\
 who came and announced to this great King,\
 "I have a subtle and wonderful Law,\
 rarely known in this world.\
 If you will undertake religious practice\
 I will expound it for you."\
 When the king heard the seer's words\
 his heart was filled with great joy.\
 Immediately he accompanied the seer,\
 providing him with whatever he needed,\
 gathering firewood, fruit and wild rice,\
 presenting them at appropriate times with respect and\
 reverence.\
 Because the wonderful Law was then his thoughts\
 he never flagged in body or mind.\
 For the sake of living beings everywhere\
 he diligently sought the great Law,\
 taking no heed for himself\
 or for the gratification of the five desires.\
 Therefore the ruler of a great kingdom\
 through diligent seeking was able to acquire this Law\
 and eventually to attain Buddhahood,\
 as I will now explain to you.\
 \
 The Buddha said to his monks: "The king at that time was I myself, and
this seer was the man who is now Devadatta. All because Devadatta was a
good friend to me, I was able to become fully endowed with this six
paramitas, pity, compassion, joy, and indifference, with the thirty-two
features, the eighty characteristics, the purple-tinged golden color,
the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, the four methods of
winning people, the eighteen unshared properties, and the transcendental
powers and the power of the way. The fact that I have attained impartial
and correct enlightenment and can save living beings on a broad scale is
all due to Devadatta who was a good friend."\
 \
 Then the Buddha said to the four kinds of believers: "Devadatta, after
immeasurable kalpas have past, will attain Buddhahood. He will be called
Heavenly King Thus Come One, worthy of offerings of right and universal
knowledge, perfect parity and conduct, well gone, understanding the
world, on itself worthy, trainer of people, teacher of heavenly and
human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One. This world will be called
Heavenly Way, and at the same time Heavenly King Buddha will abide in
the world for twenty medium kalpas, broadly preaching the Wonderful Law
for the sake of living beings. Living beings numerous as Ganges sands
will attain the fruit of arhatship. Immeasurable numbers of living
beings will conceive that desire to become pratyekabuddhas, living
beings numerous as Ganges sands will conceive a desire for the
unsurpassed way, will gain that truth of birthless-ness, and will never
regress. After Heavenly King Buddha enters parinirvana, his Correct Law
will endure in the world for twenty medium kalpas. The relics from his
whole body will be housed in a tower built of the seven treasures, sixty
yojanas in height and forty yojanas in width and depth. All the heavenly
and human beings will take assorted flowers, powdered incense, incense
for burning, paste incense, clothing, necklaces, steamers and banners,
jeweled canopies, music and songs of praise that offer them with
obeisance to the wonderful seven- jeweled tower. Immeasurable numbers of
living beings will attain the fruits of arhatship, numerous living
beings will become enlightened as pratyekabuddhas, and unimaginable
numbers of living beings will conceive a desire for bodhi and will in
reach the level of no regression."\
 \
 The Buddha said to the monks: "In future ages if there are good men or
good women who, on hearing the Devadatta Chapter of the Lotus Sutra of
the Wonderful Law, believe and revere it with pure hearts and harbor no
doubts or perplexities, they will never fall into hell or the realm of
hungry spirits or of beasts, but will be born in the presence of the
Buddhas of the ten directions, and in the place where they are born they
will constantly hear this sutra. If they are born among human or
heavenly beings, they will enjoy exceedingly wonderful delights, and if
they are born in the presence of the Buddha, they will be born by
transformation from lotus flowers."\
 \
 At that time there was a bodhisattva who was among the followers of
Many Treasures World-Honored One from the lower region and whose name
was Wisdom Accumulated. He said to Many Treasures Buddha, "Shall return
to our homeland?"\
 \
 Shakyamuni Buddha said to Wisdom Accumulated, 'good man, wait a little
while. There is a bodhisattva named Manjushri here whom you should see.
Debate and discuss the wonderful Law with him, and then you may return
to your homeland."\
 \
 At that time Manjushri was seated on a thousand-pedaled lotus blossom
big as a carriage wheel, and the bodhisattvas who had come with them
were also seated on jeweled lotus blossoms. Manjushri had emerged in a
natural manner from the palace of the dragon king Sagara in the great
ocean and was suspended in the air. Proceeding to Holy Eagle Peak, he
descended from the lotus blossom and, having entered the presence of the
Buddhas, bowed his head and paid obeisance to the feet of the two
World-Honored Ones. When he had concluded these gestures of respect, he
went to where Wisdom Accumulated was and exchanged greetings with him,
and retired then retired and sat at one side.\
 \
 Bodhisattva Wisdom Accumulated questioned Manjushri, saying, "When you
went to the palace of the dragon king, how many living beings did you
convert?"\
 \
 Manjushri replied, "The number is immeasurable, incapable of
calculation. The mouth cannot express it, the mind cannot have fathom
it. Wait a moment and there will be proof."\
 \
 Before he had finished speaking, countless bodhisattvas seated on
jeweled lotus blossoms emerged from the Ocean proceeded to Holy Eagle
Peak, where they remained suspended in the air. These bodhisattvas all
had been converted and saved by Manjushri. They had carried out all the
bodhisattva practices and discussed and expounded the six paramitas with
one another. Those who had originally been voice-hearers expounded the
practices of the voice-hearer when they were in the air, but now all
were practicing the Great Vehicle principle of emptiness.\
 \
 Manjushri said to Wisdom Accumulated, "The work of teaching and
converting carried out that in the ocean was as you can see."\
 \
 At that time Bodhisattva Wisdom Accumulated recited these verses of
praise:\
 \
 Of great wisdom and virtue, brave and stalwart,\
 you have converted and saved immeasurable beings.\
 Now those in this great assembly,\
 as well as I myself, have all seen them.\
 You expound the principle of the true entity,\
 open up the Law of the single vehicle,\
 broadly guiding the many beings,\
 causing them quickly to attain bodhi.\
 \
 Manjushri said, "When I was in the ocean I constantly expounded the
Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law alone."\
 \
 Bodhisattva Wisdom Accumulated questioned Manjushri, saying, "This
sutra is a profound, subtle and wonderful, a treasure among sutras, a
rarity in the world. Are there perhaps any living beings who, by
earnestly and diligently practicing this sutra, have been able to attain
Buddhahood quickly?"\
 \
 Manjushri replied, "There is the daughter of the dragon king Sagara,
who was just turned eight. Her wisdom has keen roots and she is good at
the understanding the root activities and of living beings. She has
mastered the dharanis, has been able to accept and embrace all the store
house of profound secrets preached by the Buddhas, has entered deep into
meditation, thoroughly grasping the doctrines, and in the space of an
instant conceived the desire for bodhi and reached the level of no
regression. Her eloquence knows no hindrance, and she thinks of living
beings with compassion as though they were her own children. She is
fully endowed with blessings, and when it comes to conceiving in mind
and expounding by mouth, she is subtle, wonderful, comprehensive and
great. Kind, compassionate, benevolent, yielding, she is gentle and
refined in will, capable of attaining bodhi."\
 \
 Bodhisattva Wisdom Accumulated said, "When I observe Shakyamuni Thus
Come One, I see that for immeasurable kalpas he carried out harsh and
difficult practices, accumulated merit, piling up virtue, seeking the
way to the bodhisattva without ever resting. I observe that throughout
the thousand-million fold world there is not a single spot tiny as a
mustard seed where this bodhisattva failed to sacrifice body and life
the sake of living beings. Only after he had done that was he able to
complete the bodhi way. I cannot believe that this girl in the space of
the instant could actually achieve correct enlightenment."\
 \
 Before his words had come to an end, the dragon king's daughter
suddenly appeared before the Buddha, bowed her head in obeisance, and
then retired to one side, reciting these verses of praise:\
 \
 He profoundly understands the signs of guilt and good fortune\
 and illuminates the ten directions everywhere.\
 His subtle, wonderful pure Dharma body\
 is endowed with the thirty-two features;\
 the eighty characteristics\
 adorn his Dharma body.\
 Heavenly and human beings gaze up in awe,\
 dragons and spirits all pay honor and respect;\
 among all living beings,\
 none who do not hold him in reverence.\
 And having heard his teachings, I have attained bodhi -\
 the Buddha alone can bear witness to this.\
 I unfold the doctrines of the Great Vehicle\
 to rescue living beings from suffering.\
 \
 At that time Shariputra said to the dragon girl, "You suppose that in
this short time you have been able to attain the unsurpassed way. But
this is difficult to believe. Why? Because a woman's body is soiled and
defiled, not a vessel for the Law. How could you attain the unsurpassed
bodhi? The road to Buddhahood is long and far-reaching. Only after one
has spent immeasurable kalpas pursuing austerities, accumulating deeds,
practicing all kinds of paramitas, can one finally achieve success.
Moreover, a woman is subject to the five obstacles. First, she cannot
become a Brahma heavenly king. Second, she cannot become the king
Shakra. Third, she cannot become a devil king. Fourth, she cannot become
a wheel-turning sage king. Fifth, she cannot become a Buddha. How then
could a woman like you be able to attain Buddhahood so quickly?"\
 \
 At that time the dragon girl had a precious jewel worth as much as the
thousand-million-fold world which she presented to the Buddha. The
Buddha immediately excepted it. The dragon girl said to Bodhisattva
Wisdom Accumulated to the venerable one, Shariputra, "I presented the
precious jewel and the World-Honored One accepted it - was that not
quickly done?"\
 \
 They replied, "Very quickly!"\
 \
 The girls said, "employ your supernatural powers and watch me attain
Buddhahood. It shall be even quicker than that!"\
 \
 At that time the members of the assembly all saw the dragon girl in the
space of an instant change into a man and carry out all the practices of
a bodhisattva, immediately proceeding to the Spotless World of the
south, taking a seat on a jeweled lotus, and attaining impartial and
correct enlightenment. With the thirty-two features and the eighty
characteristics, he expounded the wonderful Law for all living beings
everywhere in the ten directions.\
 \
 At that time in the saha world to a the bodhisattvas, voice-hearers,
gods, dragons and others of the eight kinds of guardians, human and
non-human beings all from a distance saw the dragon girl become a Buddha
and preach the law to all the human and heavenly beings in the assembly
at that time. Their hearts were filled with great joy and all from a
distance paid reverent obeisance. Immeasurable living beings, hearing
the Law, understood it and were able to reach the level of no
regression. Immeasurable living beings received prophecies that they
would gain the away. The Spotless World quaked and trembled in six
different ways. Three thousand living beings of the saha world remained
on the level of no regression. Three thousand living beings conceived a
desire for bodhi and received prophecies of enlightenment. Bodhisattva
Wisdom Accumulated, Shariputra and all the other members of the assembly
silently believed and accepted these things.
