---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:58:54'
layout: page
slug: chapter-fifteen-emerging-from-the-earth
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Fifteen: Emerging from the Earth'
wordpress_id: '3586'
---

At that time the bodhisattvas and mahasattvas who had gathered from the
lands of the other directions, greater in number than sands of eight
Ganges, stood up in the midst of the great assembly, pressed their palms
together, bowed in obeisance and said to the Buddha: "World-Honored One,
if you will permit us in the age after the Buddha has entered extinction
to diligently and earnestly protect, read, recite, copy and offer alms
to this sutra in the saha world, we will preach it widely throughout
this land!"\
 \
 At that time the Buddha said to the bodhisattvas and mahasattvas: Leave
off, good men! There is no need for you to protect this sutra. Why?
Because in this saha world of mine there are bodhisattvas and
mahasattvas who are as numerous as the sands of sixty thousand Ganges,
and each of these bodhisattvas has a retinue equal to the sands of sixty
thousand Ganges. After I have entered extinction these persons will be
able to protect, read, recite and widely preach this sutra.\
 \
 When the Buddha spoke these words, the earth of the thousand
millionfold countries of the saha world all trembled and split open, and
out of it emerged at the same instant immeasurable thousands, ten
thousands, millions of bodhisattvas and mahasattvas. The bodies of these
bodhisattvas were all golden in hue, with the thirty-two features and an
immeasurable brightness. Previously they all had been dwelling in the
world of empty space beneath the saha world. But when these bodhisattvas
heard the voice of the Shakyamuni Buddha speaking, they came up from
below.\
 \
 Each one of these bodhisattvas was the leader of his own great
assembly, and each brought with him a retinue equal in number to the
sands of sixty thousand Ganges. To say nothing of those who brought
retinues equal to the sands of fifty thousand, forty thousand, thirty
thousand, twenty thousand, or ten thousand Ganges. Or a retinue equal to
as little as the sands of one Ganges, half a Ganges, one fourth of a
Ganges, or as little as one part in a thousand, ten thousand, a million
nayutas of Ganges. Or those whose retinue was only one thousand ten
thousand million nayutas. Or only a million ten thousand. Or only a
thousand ten thousand, a hundred ten thousand, or just ten thousand. Or
only one thousand, one hundred, or ten. Or who brought with them only
five, four, three, two or one disciple. Or those who came alone,
preferring to carry out solitary practices. Such were they, then,
immeasurable, boundless, beyond anything that can be known through
calculation, simile or parable.\
 \
 After these bodhisattvas that emerged from the earth, they each one
proceeded to the wonderful tower of seven treasures suspended in the sky
where Many Treasures Thus Come One and Shakyamuni Buddha were. On
reaching it, they turned to the two World-Honored Ones, bowed their
heads and made obeisance at their feet. They also all performed
obeisance to the Buddhas seated on lion thrones underneath the jeweled
trees. Then they circled around to the right three times, pressed their
palms together in a gesture of respect, utilizing the bodhisattvas'
various methods of praising to deliver praises, and then took up a
position to one side, gazing up in joy at the two World-Honored Ones.
While these bodhisattvas and mahasattvas who had emerged from the earth
were employing the bodhisattva's various methods of praising to praise
the Buddhas, an interval of fifty small kalpas passed by.\
 \
 At that time Shakyamuni Buddha sat silent, and the four kinds of
believers likewise all remained silent for fifty small kalpas, but
because of the supernatural powers of the Buddha, it was made to seem to
the members of the great assembly like only half a day.\
 \
 At that time the four kinds of believers, also because of the
supernatural powers of the Buddha, saw these bodhisattvas filling the
sky over immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, and millions
of lands. Among these bodhisattvas were four leaders. The first was
called Superior Practices, the second was called Boundless Practices,
the third was called Pure Practices, and the fourth was called Firmly
Established Practices. These four bodhisattvas were the foremost leaders
and guiding teachers among all the group. In the presence of the great
assembly, each one of these pressed his palms together, gazed at
Shakyamuni Buddha and inquired: "World-Honored One, are your illnesses
few, are your worries few, are your practices proceeding comfortably? Do
those whom you propose to save readily receive instruction? Does the
effort not cause the World-Honored One to become weary and spent?\
 \
 At that time the four great bodhisattvas spoke in verse form saying:\
 \
 Is the World Honored One comfortable,\
 with few illnesses, few worries?\
 In teaching and converting living beings,\
 can you do so without fatigue and weariness?\
 And do living beings\
 receive instruction readily or not?\
 Does it not cause the World-Honored One\
 to become weary and spent?\
 \
 At that time in the midst of the great assembly of bodhisattvas the
World-Honored One spoke these words: "Just so, just so, good men! The
Thus Come One is well and happy, with few ills and few worries.\
 \
 The living beings are readily converted and saved and I am not weary
and spent. Why? Because for age after age in the past the living beings
have constantly received my instruction. And also they have offered alms
and paid reverence to the Buddhas of the past and have planted various
good roots. So when these living beings see me for the first time and
listen to my preaching, they all immediately believe and accept it,
entering into the wisdom of the Thus Come One, with the exception of
those who earlier practiced and studied the Lesser Vehicle. And now I
will make it possible for these persons to listen to this sutra and
enter the wisdom of the Buddha."\
 \
 At that time the [four] great bodhisattvas spoke in verse form,
saying:\
 \
 Excellent, excellent,\
 Great hero, World-Honored One!\
 The living beings\
 are readily converted and saved.\
 They know how to inquire about\
 the most profound wisdom of the Buddha,\
 and having heard, they believe and understand it.\
 We are accordingly overjoyed.\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One praised the great bodhisattvas who
led the group, saying: "Excellent, excellent, good men! You know how to
rejoice in your hearts for the Thus Come One."\
 \
 At that time the bodhisattva Maitreya and the multitude of bodhisattvas
equal in number to the sands of eight thousand Ganges all thought to
themselves: Never in the past have we seen or heard of such a great
multitude of bodhisattvas and mahasattvas as these who have emerged from
the earth and now stand before the World-Honored One pressing their
palms together, offering alms, and inquiring about the Thus Come One!\
 \
 At that time the bodhisattva and mahasattvas Maitreya, knowing the
thought that was in the minds of the bodhisattvas as numerous as the
sands of eight thousand Ganges, and wishing also to resolve his own
doubts, pressed his palms together, turned to the Buddha and made this
inquiry in verse form:\
 \
 Immeasurable thousands, ten thousands, millions,\
 a great host of bodhisattvas\
 such as was never seen in the past -\
 I beg the most honored of two-legged beings to explain\
 where they have come from,\
 what causes and conditions bring them together!\
 Huge in body, with great transcendental powers,\
 unfathomable in wisdom,\
 firm in their intent and thought,\
 with the power of great perseverance,\
 the kind living beings delight to see -\
 where have they come from?\
 Each one of these bodhisattvas\
 brings with them a retinue\
 immeasurable in number\
 like the sands of the Ganges.\
 Some of these great bodhisattvas\
 bring numbers equal to sixty thousand Ganges sands.\
 And this great multitude\
 with a single mind seek the Buddha way.\
 These great teachers\
 equal in number to sixty thousand Ganges sands\
 together come to offer alms to the Buddha\
 and to guard and uphold this sutra.\
 More numerous are those with followers\
 like the sands of fifty thousand Ganges,\
 those with followers like the sands of forty thousand,\
 thirty thousand,\
 twenty thousand, ten thousand,\
 one thousand, one hundred,\
 or the sands of the single Ganges,\
 half a Ganges, one-third, one-fourth,\
 or only one part in a million ten thousand;\
 those with one thousand, ten thousand nayutas,\
 ten thousand, a million disciples,\
 or half a million-\
 they are more numerous still.\
 Those with a million or ten thousand followers,\
 a thousand or a hundred,\
 fifty or ten,\
 three, two or one,\
 or those who come alone without followers,\
 delighting in solitude,\
 all coming to where the Buddha is-\
 they are even more numerous than those described above.\
 If one should try to use an abacus\
 to calculate the number of this great multitude,\
 though he spent as many kalpas as Ganges sands\
 he could never know the full sum.\
 This host of bodhisattvas\
 with their great dignity, virtue and diligence -\
 who preached the Law for them,\
 who taught and converted them and brought them to this?\
 Under whom did they first set their minds on enlightenment,\
 what Buddha's Law do they praise and proclaim?\
 What sutra do they embrace and carry out,\
 what Buddha way do they practice?\
 These bodhisattvas\
 possess transcendental powers and the power of great wisdom.\
 The earth in four directions trembles and splits\
 and they all emerged from out of it.\
 World-Honored One, from times past\
 I have seen nothing like this!\
 I beg you to tell me where they come from,\
 the name of the land.\
 I have constantly journeyed from land to land\
 but never have I seen such a thing!\
 In this whole multitude\
 there is not one person that I know.\
 Suddenly they have come up from the earth -\
 I beg you to explain the cause.\
 The members of this great assembly now,\
 the immeasurable hundreds, thousands, millions\
 of bodhisattvas,\
 all want to know these things.\
 Regarding the causes that govern the beginning and end\
 of this multitude of bodhisattvas,\
 possessor of immeasurable virtue, World-Honored One,\
 we beg you to dispel the doubts of the assembly!\
 \
 At that time the Buddhas who were emanations of Shakyamuni Buddha and
had arrived from immeasurable thousands, ten thousands, millions of
lands in other directions, were seated cross-legged on lion seats under
the jeweled trees in the eight directions. The attendants of these
Buddhas all saw the great multitude of bodhisattvas who had emerged from
the earth in the four directions of the thousand-million-fold world and
were suspended in the air, and each one said to his respective Buddha:
"World-Honored One, this great multitude of immeasurable, boundless
asamkhyas of bodhisattvas - were did they come from?"\
 \
 At the time each of the Buddhas spoke to his attendants, saying: "Good
men, wait a moment. There is a bodhisattva and mahasattva named Maitreya
who has received a prophecy from Shakyamuni Buddha that he will be the
next thereafter to become a Buddha. He has already inquired about this
matter and the Buddha is now about to answer him. You should take this
opportunity to listen to what he says."\
 \
 At that time Shakyamuni Buddha said to the bodhisattva Maitreya:
"Excellent, excellent, Ajita that you should question the Buddha about
this great affair. All of you with a single mind should don the armor of
diligence and determine to be firm in intent. The Thus Come One wishes
now to summon forth and declare the wisdom of the Buddhas, the freely
exercised transcendental power of the Buddhas, the power of the Buddhas
that has the lion's ferocity, the fierce and greatly forceful power of
the Buddhas.\
 \
 At the time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 Be diligent and of a single mind,\
 for I wish to explain this affair.\
 Have no doubts or regrets -\
 the Buddha wisdom is hard to fathom.\
 Now you must put forth the power of faith,\
 abiding in patience in goodness.\
 \
 A Law which in the past was never heard\
 you will now be able to hear.\
 Now I will bring you ease and consolation -\
 do not harbor doubts or fears.\
 The Buddha has nothing but truthful words,\
 his wisdom cannot be measured.\
 This foremost Law that he has gained\
 is very profound, incapable of analysis.\
 He will now expound it -\
 you must listen with a single mind.\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, having spoken these verses, said to
the bodhisattva Maitreya: "With regard to this great multitude I now say
to you. Ajita, these bodhisattvas and mahasattvas who in immeasurable
and countless asamkhyas have emerged from the earth and whom you have
never seen before in the past - when I had attained
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi in this saha world, I converted and guided
these bodhisattvas, trained their minds and caused them to develop a
longing for the way. These bodhisattvas all have been dwelling in the
world of empty space underneath the saha world. They read, recite,
understand the various scriptures, ponder them, make distinctions and
keep them correctly in mind.\
 \
 Ajita, these good men take no delight in being in the assembly and
indulging in much talk. Their delight is constantly to be in a quiet
place, exerting themselves diligently and never resting. Nor do they
linger among human or heavenly beings, but constantly delight in
profound wisdom, being free from all hindrances. And they constantly
delight in the law of the Buddhas, diligently and with a single mind
pursuing unsurpassed wisdom."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 Ajita, you should understand this.\
 These great bodhisattvas\
 for countless kalpas\
 have practice the Buddha wisdom.\
 All have been converted by me;\
 I caused them to set their minds on the great way.\
 \
 These are my sons,\
 they dwell in this world,\
 constantly carrying out dhuta practices,\
 preferring a quiet place,\
 rejecting the fret and confusion of the great assembly,\
 taking no delight in much talk.\
 In this manner these sons\
 study and practice my way and Law.\
 And in order that day and night with constant diligence\
 they may seek the Buddha way,\
 in this saha world\
 they dwell in the empty space in its lower part.\
 Firm in the power of will and concentration,\
 with constant diligence seeking wisdom,\
 they expound various wonderful doctrines\
 and their minds are without fear.\
 When I was in the city of Gaya,\
 seated beneath the bodhi tree,\
 I attained the highest, the correct enlightenment\
 and turned the wheel of the unsurpassed Law.\
 Therefore I taught and converted them,\
 caused them for the first time to set their minds on the way.\
 Now all of them dwell in the stage of no regression,\
 and all in time will be able to become Buddhas.\
 What I speak now are true words -\
 with a single mind you must believe them!\
 Ever since the long distant past\
 I have been teaching and converting this multitude.\
 \
 At that time the bodhisattva and mahasattva Maitreya, as well as the
countless other bodhisattvas, found doubts and perplexities rising in
their minds. They were puzzled at this thing that had never happened
before and thought to themselves: How could the World-Honored One in
such a short space of time have taught and converted an immeasurable,
boundless asamkhya number of great bodhisattvas of this sort enabled
them to dwell in anuttara-samyak-sambodhi?\
 \
 Thereupon Maitreya said to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, when the
Thus Come One was crown prince, you left the palace of the Shakyas and
sat in the place of practice not far from the city of Gaya, and there
attained anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Barely forty years or more have
passed since then. World-Honored One, how in that short time could you
have accomplished so much work as a Buddha? Was it through the
authoritative powers of the Buddha, or through the blessings of the
Buddha, that you were able to teach and convert such an immeasurable
number of great bodhisattvas and enable them to achieve
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi? World-Honored One, a multitude of great
bodhisattvas such as this - a person might spend a thousand, ten
thousand, a million kalpas counting them and never be able to reach the
end or discover the limit! Since the far distant past, in the dwelling
place of immeasurable, boundless numbers of Buddhas, they must have
planted good roots, carried out the bodhisattva way, and engaged,
constantly in Brahma practices. World-Honored One, it is hard for the
world to believe such thing!\
 \
 Suppose, for example, that a young man of twenty-five, with ruddy
complexion and hair still black, should point to someone who was a
hundred years old and say, 'This is my son!' or that the hundred year
old man should point to the youth and say, 'This is my father who sired
and raised me!' This would be hard to believe, and so too is what the
Buddha says.\
 \
 "It has in fact not been long since you attained the way. But this
great multitude of bodhisattvas have already for immeasurable thousands,
ten thousands, millions of kalpas applied themselves diligently and
earnestly for the sake of the Buddha way. They have learned to enter
into, emerge from and dwell in immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten
thousands, millions of samadhis, have acquired great transcendental
powers, have over a long period carried out brahma practices, and have
been able step by step to practice various good doctrines, becoming
skilled in questions and answers, a treasure among persons, something
seldom known in all the worlds. And today, World-Honored One, you tell
us that, in the time since you attained the Buddha way, you have caused
these persons for the first time to aspire to enlightenment, have
taught, converted and led them, and directed them toward
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi!\
 \
 "World-Honored One, it is not long since you attained Buddhahood, and
yet you have been able to carry out this great meritorious undertaking!
We ourselves have faith in the Buddha, believing that he preaches in
accordance with what is a appropriate, that the words spoken by the
Buddha are never false, and that the Buddha's knowledge is in all cases
penetrating and comprehensive. Nevertheless, in the period after the
Buddha has entered extinction, if bodhisattvas who have just begun to
aspire to enlightenment should hear these words, they will perhaps not
believe or accept them but will be led to commit the crime of rejecting
the Law. Therefore, World-Honored One, we beg you to explain so we may
put aside our doubts, and so that, in future ages when good men hear
this matter, they will not entertain doubts!\
 \
 At that time the bodhisattva Maitreya, wishing to state his meaning
once more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 In the past the Buddha departed from the Shakya clan,\
 left his household, and near Gaya\
 set under the bodhi tree.\
 Little time has passed since then,\
 yet these sons of the Buddha\
 are immeasurable in number!\
 Already for a long time they have practiced the Buddha way,\
 dwelling in transcendental powers and the power of wisdom,\
 skillfully learning the bodhisattva way,\
 unsoiled by worldly things\
 like the lotus flower in the water.\
 Emerging from the earth,\
 all display a reverent and respectful mind,\
 standing in the presence of the World-Honored One.\
 This is difficult to fathom -\
 How can one believe it?\
 The Buddha attained the way very recently,\
 yet those he has helped to gain success are so many!\
 We beg you to dispel the doubts of the assembly,\
 to make distinctions and explain the truth of the matter.\
 It is though a young man\
 just turned twenty-five\
 were to point to a hundred year old man\
 with gray hair and wrinkled face\
 and say, I sired him!'\
 And the old man were to say, 'This is my father!'\
 \
 The father youthful, the son old -\
 no one in the world could believe this!\
 World-Honored One, your case is similar.\
 Only very recently you attained the way.\
 These bodhisattvas\
 are firm in will, in no way timid or immature.\
 For measurable kalpas\
 they have been practicing the bodhisattva way.\
 They are clever at difficult questions and answers,\
 their minds know no fear.\
 They have firmly cultivated a persevering mind,\
 upright in dignity and virtue.\
 They are praised by the Buddhas of the ten directions\
 as able and adept at preaching distinctions.\
 They have no wish to remain among the crowd\
 but constantly favor a state of meditation,\
 and in order to seek the Buddha way\
 they have been dwelling in the space under the earth.\
 This we have heard from the Buddha\
 and have no doubts in the matter.\
 But for the sake of future ages we beg the Buddha\
 to explain and bring about understanding.\
 If with regard to this sutra\
 one should harbor doubt and fail to believe,\
 he will fall at once into the evil paths.\
 So we beg you now to explain.\
 These immeasurable bodhisattvas -\
 how in such a short time\
 did you teach them, cause them to have aspiring minds,\
 and to dwell in the stage of no regression?
