---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:59:39'
layout: page
slug: chapter-sixteen-the-life-span-of-the-tathagata
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Sixteen: The Life Span of the Tathagata'
wordpress_id: '3588'
---

At that time the Buddha spoke to the Bodhisattvas and all the great
assembly: "Good men, you must believe and understand the truthful words
of the Thus Come One." And again he said to the great assembly: You must
believe and understand the truthful words of the Thus Come One." And
once more he said to the great assembly: "You must believe and
understand the truthful words of the Thus Come One."\
 \
 At that time the bodhisattvas and the great assembly, with Maitreya as
their leader, pressed their palms together and addressed the Buddha,
saying: "World-Honored One, we beg you to explain. We will believe and
accept the Buddha's words." They spoke in this manner three times, and
then said once more: "We beg you to explain it. We will believe and
accept the Buddha's words."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, seeing that the bodhisattvas
repeated their request three times and more, spoke to them, saying: "You
must listen carefully and hear of the Thus Come One's secret and his
transcendental powers. In all the worlds the heavenly and human beings
and asuras all believe that the present Shakyamuni Buddha, after leaving
the palace of the Shakyas, seated himself in the place of practice not
far from the city of Gaya and there attained annuttara-samyak-sambodhi.
But good men, it has been immeasurable, boundless hundreds, thousands,
ten thousands, millions of nayutas of kalpas since I in fact attained
Buddhahood.\
 \
 "Suppose a person were to take five hundred, a thousand, ten thousand,
a million nayuta asamkhya thousand-million-fold worlds and grind them to
dust. Then, moving eastward, each time he passes five hundred, a
thousand, ten thousand, a million nayuta asamkhya worlds he drops a
particle of dust. He continues eastward in this way until he has
finished dropping all the particles. Good men, what is your opinion? Can
the total number of all these worlds be imagined or calculated?"\
 \
 The bodhisattva Maitreya and the others said to the Buddha:
"World-Honored One, these worlds are immeasurable, boundless--one cannot
calculate their number, nor does the mind have the power to encompass
them. Even all the voice-hearers and pratyekabuddhas with their wisdom
free of outflows could not imagine or understand how many there are.
Although we abide in the stage of avivartika, we cannot comprehend such
a matter. World-Honored One, these worlds are immeasurable and
boundless."\
 \
 At that time the Buddha said to the multitude of great bodhisattvas:
"Good men, now I will state this to you clearly. Suppose all these
worlds, whether they received a particle of dust or not, are once more
reduced to dust. Let one particle represent one kalpa. The time that has
passed since I attained Buddhahood surpasses this by a hundred, a
thousand, ten thousand, a million nayuta asamkhya kalpas.\
 \
 "Ever since then I have been constantly in this saha world, preaching
the Law, teaching and converting, and elsewhere I have led and benefited
living beings in hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of nayutas
and asamkhyas of lands.\
 \
 "Good men, during that time I have spoken about the Buddha Burning
Torch and others, and described how they entered nirvana. All this I
employed as an expedient means to make distinctions.\
 \
 "Good men, if there are living beings who come to me, I employ my
Buddha eye to observe their faith and to see if their other faculties
are keen or dull, and then depending upon how receptive they are to
salvation, I appear in different places and preach to them under
different names, and describe the length of time during which my
teachings will be effective. Sometimes when I make my appearance I say
that I am about to enter nirvana, and also employ different expedient
means to preach the subtle and wonderful Law, thus causing living beings
to awaken joyful minds.\
 \
 "Good men, the Thus Come One observes how among living beings there are
those who delight in a little Law, meager in virtue and heavy with
defilement. For such persons I describe how in my youth I left my
household and attained anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. But in truth the time
since I attained Buddhahood is extremely long, as I have told you. It is
simply that I use this expedient means to teach and convert living
beings and cause them to enter the Buddha way. That is why I speak in
this manner.\
 \
 "Good men, the scriptures expounded by the Thus Come One are all for
the purpose of saving and emancipating living beings. Sometimes I speak
of myself, sometimes of others: sometimes I present myself, sometimes
others; sometimes I show my own actions, sometimes those of others. All
that I preach is true and not false.\
 \
 Why do I do this? The Thus Come One perceives the true aspect of the
threefold world exactly as it is. There is no ebb or flow of birth and
death, and there is no existing in this world and later entering
extinction. It is neither substantial nor empty, neither consistent nor
diverse. Nor is it what those who dwell in the threefold world perceive
it to be. All such things the Thus Come One sees clearly and without
error.\
 \
 "Because living beings have different natures, different desires,
different actions, and different ways of thinking and making
distinctions, and because I want to enable them to put down good roots,
I employ a variety of causes and conditions, similes, parables, and
phrases and preach different doctrines. This, the Buddha's work, I have
never for a moment neglected.\
 \
 "Thus, since I attained Buddhahood, an extremely long period of time
has passed. My life span is an immeasurable number of asamkhya kalpas,
and during that time I have constantly abided here without ever entering
extinction. Good men, originally I practiced the bodhisattva way, and
the life span that I acquired then has yet to come to an end but will
last twice the number of years that have already passed. Now, however,
although in fact I do not actually enter extinction, I announce that I
am going to adopt the course of extinction. This is an expedient means
which the Thus Come One uses to teach and convert living beings.\
 \
 "Why do I do this? Because if the Buddha remains in the world for a
long time, those persons with shallow virtue will fail to plant good
roots but, living in poverty and lowliness, will become attached to the
five desires and be caught in the net of deluded thoughts and
imaginings. If they see that the Thus Come One is constantly in the
world and never enters extinction, they will grow arrogant and selfish,
or become discouraged and neglectful. They will fail to realize how
difficult it is to encounter the Buddha and will not approach him with a
respectful and reverent mind.\
 \
 "Therefore as an expedient means the Thus Come One says: 'Monks, you
should know that it is a rare thing to live at a time when one of the
Buddhas appears in the world.' Why does he do this? Because persons of
shallow virtue may pass immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands,
millions of kalpas with some of them chancing to see a Buddha and others
never seeing one at all. For this reason I say to them: 'Monks, the Thus
Come One is hard to get to see.' When living beings hear these words,
they are certain to realize how difficult it is to encounter the Buddha.
In their minds they will harbor a longing and will thirst to gaze upon
the Buddha, and then they will work to plant good roots. Therefore the
Thus Come One, though in truth he does not enter extinction, speaks of
passing into extinction.\
 \
 "Good men, the Buddhas and Thus Come Ones all preach a Law such as
this. They act in order to save all living beings, so what they do is
true and not false.\
 \
 "Suppose, for example, that there is a skilled physician who is wise
and understanding and knows how to compound medicines to effectively
cure all kinds of diseases. He has many sons, perhaps ten, twenty, or
even a hundred. He goes off to some other land far away to see about a
certain affair. After he has gone, the children drink some kind of
poison that make them distraught with pain and they fall writhing to the
ground.\
 \
 "At that time the father returns to his home and finds that his
children have drunk poison. Some are completely out of their minds,
while others are not. Seeing their father from far off, all are
overjoyed and kneel down and entreat him, saying: 'How fine that you
have returned safely. We were stupid and by mistake drank some poison.
We beg you to cure us and let us live out our lives!'\
 \
 "The father, seeing his children suffering like this, follows various
prescriptions. Gathering fine medicinal herbs that meet all the
requirements of color, fragrance and flavor, he grinds, sifts and mixes
them together. Giving a dose of these to his children, he tells them:
'This is a highly effective medicine, meeting all the requirements of
color, fragrance and flavor. Take it and you will quickly be relieved of
your sufferings and will be free of all illness.'\
 \
 "Those children who have not lost their senses can see that this is
good medicine, outstanding in both color and fragrance, so they take it
immediately and are completely cured of their sickness. Those who are
out of their minds are equally delighted to see their father return and
beg him to cure their sickness, but when they are given the medicine,
they refuse to take it. Why? Because the poison has penetrated deeply
and their minds no longer function as before. So although the medicine
is of excellent color and fragrance, they do not perceive it as good.\
 \
 "The father thinks to himself: My poor children! Because of the poison
in them, their minds are completely befuddled. Although they are happy
to see me and ask me to cure them, they refuse to take this excellent
medicine. I must now resort to some expedient means to induce them to
take the medicine. So he says to them: 'You should know that I am now
old and worn out, and the time of my death has come. I will leave this
good medicine here. You should take it and not worry that it will not
cure you.' Having given these instructions, he then goes off to another
land where he sends a messenger home to announce, 'Your father is
dead.'\
 \
 "At that time the children, hearing that their father has deserted them
and died, are filled with great grief and consternation and think to
themselves: If our father were alive he would have pity on us and see
that we are protected. But now he has abandoned us and died in some
other country far away. We are shelter-less orphans with no one to rely
on!\
 \
 "Constantly harboring such feelings of grief, they at last come to
their senses and realize that the medicine is in fact excellent in color
and fragrance and flavor, and so they take it and are healed of all the
effects of the poison. The father, hearing that his children are all
cured, immediately returns home and appears to them all once more.\
 \
 "Good men, what is your opinion? Can anyone say that this skilled
physician is guilty of lying?"\
 \
 "No, World-Honored One."\
 \
 The Buddha said: "It is the same with me. It has been immeasurable,
boundless hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of nayuta and
asamkhya kalpas since I attained Buddhahood. But for the sake of living
beings I employ the power of expedient means and say that I am about to
pass into extinction. In view of the circumstances, however, no one can
say that I have been guilty of lies or falsehoods."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 Since I attained Buddhahood\
 the number of kalpas that have passed\
 is an immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands,\
 millions, trillions, asamkhyas.\
 Constantly I have preached the Law, teaching, converting\
 countless millions of living beings,\
 causing them to enter the Buddha way,\
 all this for immeasurable kalpas.\
 In order to save living beings,\
 as an expedient means I appear to enter nirvana\
 but in truth I do not pass into extinction.\
 I am always here preaching the Law.\
 I am always here,\
 but through my transcendental powers\
 I make it so that living beings in their befuddlement\
 do not see me even when close by.\
 When the multitude see that I have passed into extinction,\
 far and wide they offer alms to my relics.\
 \
 All harbor thoughts of yearning\
 and in their minds thirst to gaze at me.\
 When living beings have become truly faithful,\
 honest and upright, gentle in intent,\
 single-mindedly desiring to see the Buddha\
 not hesitating even if it costs them their lives,\
 then I and the assembly of monks\
 appear together on Holy Eagle Peak.\
 At that time I tell the living beings\
 that I am always here, never entering extinction,\
 but that because of the power of an expedient means\
 at times I appear to be extinct, at other times not,\
 and that if there are living beings in other lands\
 who are reverent and sincere in their wish to believe,\
 then among them too\
 I will preach the unsurpassed Law.\
 But you have not heard of this,\
 so you suppose that I enter extinction.\
 When I look at living beings\
 I see them drowned in a sea of suffering;\
 therefore I do not show myself,\
 causing them to thirst for me.\
 Then when their minds are filled with yearning,\
 at last I appear and preach the Law for them.\
 Such are my transcendental powers.\
 For asamkhya kalpas\
 constantly I have dwelled on Holy Eagle Peak\
 and in various other places.\
 When living beings witness the end of a kalpa\
 and all is consumed in a great fire,\
 this, my land, remains safe and tranquil,\
 constantly filled with heavenly and human beings.\
 The halls and pavilions in its gardens and groves\
 are adorned with various kinds of gems.\
 Jeweled trees abound in flowers and fruit\
 where living beings enjoy themselves at ease.\
 The gods strike heavenly drums,\
 constantly making many kinds of music.\
 \
 Mandarava blossoms rain down,\
 scattering over the Buddha and the great assembly.\
 My pure land is not destroyed,\
 yet the multitude see it as consumed in fire,\
 with anxiety, fear and other sufferings\
 filling it everywhere.\
 These living beings with their various offenses,\
 through causes arising from their evil actions,\
 spend asamkhya kalpas\
 without hearing the name of the Three Treasures.\
 But those who practice meritorious ways,\
 who are gentle, peaceful, honest and upright,\
 all of them will see me\
 here in person, preaching the Law.\
 At times for this multitude\
 I describe the Buddha's life span as immeasurable,\
 and to those who see the Buddha only after a long time\
 I explain how difficult it is to meet the Buddha.\
 Such is the power of my wisdom\
 that its sagacious beams shine without measure.\
 This life span of countless kalpas\
 I gained as the result of lengthy practice.\
 You who are possessed of wisdom,\
 entertain no doubts on this point!\
 Cast them off, end them forever,\
 for the Buddha's words are true, not false.\
 He is like a skilled physician\
 who uses an expedient means to cure his deranged sons.\
 Though in fact alive, he gives out word he is dead,\
 yet no one can say he speaks falsely.\
 I am the father of this world,\
 saving those who suffer and are afflicted.\
 Because of the befuddlement of ordinary people,\
 though I live, I give out word I have entered extinction.\
 For if they see me constantly,\
 arrogance and selfishness arise in their minds.\
 Abandoning restraint, they give themselves up to the\
 five desires\
 and fall into the evil paths of existence.\
 Always I am aware of which living beings\
 practice the way, and which do not,\
 and in response to their needs for salvation\
 I preach various doctrines for them.\
 At all times I think to myself:\
 How can I cause living beings\
 to gain entry into the unsurpassed way\
 and quickly acquire the body of a Buddha?
