---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 12:09:15'
layout: page
slug: chapter-twenty-seven-the-former-deeds-of-king-wondrous-splendor
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Twenty-seven: The Former Deeds of King Wondrous Splendor'
wordpress_id: '3610'
---

At that time the Buddha addressed the great assembly, saying: "In an age
long ago, an immeasurable, boundless, inconceivable number of asamkhya
kalpas in the past, there was a Buddha named Cloud Thunder Sound
Constellation King Flower Wisdom, tathagata, arhat, samyak-sambuddha.
His land was named Light Bright Adornment and his kalpa was named Gladly
Seen. In the midst of this Buddha's Law there was a king named Wonderful
Adornment. This king's consort was named Pure Virtue, and he had two
sons, one named Pure Storehouse and the other named Pure Eye. These two
sons possessed great supernatural powers, merit, virtue, wisdom, and for
a long time they had been practicing the way appropriate to a
bodhisattva, carrying out the dana-paramita, shila-paramita,
kshanti-paramita, virya-paramita, dhynana-paramita, pragna-paramita, the
paramita of expedient means, pity, compassion, joy and indifference, as
well as the thirty-seven aids to the way 9 . All of these they had
thoroughly understood and mastered. In addition, they had gained the
samadhis of the bodhisattva, namely, the pure samadhi; sun, star, and
constellation samadhi; pure light samadhi; pure color samadhi; pure
illumination samadhi; long adornment samadhi; and great dignity and
virtue storehouse samadhi, and had thoroughly mastered all these
samadhis.\
 \
 "At that time that Buddha, wishing to attract and guide King Wonderful
Adornment, and because he thought with compassion of living beings,
preached the Lotus Sutra. The king's two sons, Pure Storehouse and Pure
Eye, went to where their mother was, pressed their palms and the nails
of their ten fingers together, and said to her, 'We beg our mother to go
and visit the place where the Buddha Cloud Thunder Sound Constellation
King Flower Wisdom is. We too will attend him, drawing near to the
Buddha and offering alms and obeisance. Why? Because this Buddha is
preaching the Lotus Sutra in the midst of all the multitude of heavenly
and human beings and it is right that we should listen and accept it.'\
 \
 "The mother announced to her sons, 'Your father puts his faith in
non-Buddhist doctrines and is deeply attached to the Brahmanical Law.
You should go to your father, tell him about this, and persuade him to
go with you.'\
 \
 "Pure Storehouse and Pure Eye pressed their palms and ten fingernails
together and said to their mother, 'We are sons of the Dharma King, and
yet we have been born into this family of heretical views!'\
 \
 "The mother said to her sons, 'You are right to think with concern
about your father. You should manifest some supernatural wonder for him.
When he sees that, his mind will surely be cleansed and purified and he
will permit us to go to where the Buddha is.'\
 \
 The two sons, being concerned about their father, leaped up into the
air to the height of seven tala trees and there performed various types
of supernatural wonders, walking, standing, sitting, and lying down in
midair; making water come out of the upper part of their bodies; making
fire come out of the lower part of their bodies, making water come out
of the lower part of their bodies; making fire come at of the upper part
of their bodies; manifesting huge bodies that filled the sky and then
making themselves small again; after becoming small, making themselves
big again; disappearing in the midst of the sky and then suddenly
appearing on the ground; sinking into the ground as though it were
water; walking on the water as though it were land. They manifested
these various types of supernatural wonders in order to cause the mind
of their royal father to become pure and to make him believe and
understand.\
 \
 "At that time when the father saw his sons displaying supernatural
powers of this kind, his mind was filled with great delight, as he had
never known before, and he pressed his palms together, faced his sons
and said, "Who is your teacher? Whose disciples are you?'\
 \
 "The two sons replied, "Great king, the Buddha Cloud Thunder Sound
Constellation King Flower Wisdom is at present sitting in the Dharma
seat under the seven-jeweled bodhi tree and, amid the multitudes of
heavenly and human beings of all the world, is broadly expounding the
Lotus Sutra. This is our teacher and we are his disciples.'\
 \
 "The father said to his sons, 'I would like to go now and see your
teacher, You can go with me.'\
 \
 "With this the two sons descended from the air, proceeded to where
their mother was, pressed their palms together and said to their mother,
'Our royal father has now come to believe and understand, he is fully
capable of conceiving a desire for anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. We have
finished doing the Buddha's work for the sake of our father. We beg that
our mother will permit us to go to the place where the Buddha is, to
leave the household life and to practice the way.'\
 \
 "At that time the two sons, wishing to state their meaning once more,
spoke in verse form, saying to their mother:\
 \
 We beg our mother to permit us\
 to leave the household and become shramanas.\
 The Buddhas are very hard to encounter;\
 we will follow this Buddha and learn from him.\
 Rare as is the udumbara flower,\
 rarer is it to encounter a Buddha,\
 and escaping from difficulties is also difficult--\
 we beg you to allow us to leave the household.\
 \
 "Their mother then said to them, 'I will permit you to leave the
household life. Why? Because the Buddha is difficult to encounter.'\
 \
 "The two sons then addressed their father and mother, saying:
'Excellent, father and mother! And we beg you in due time to go to the
place where the Buddha Cloud Thunder Sound Constellation King Flower
Wisdom is, attend him in person and offer alms. Why? Because
encountering the Buddha is as difficult as encountering the udumbara
flower. Or as difficult as it is for a one-eyed turtle to encounter a
floating log with a hole in it. We have been blessed with great good
fortune from past existences and so have been born in an age where we
can encounter the Buddha's Law. For this reason our father and mother
should permit us to leave household life. Why? Because the Buddhas are
difficult to encounter, and the proper time is also hard to come upon.'\
 \
 "At that time the eighty-four thousand persons in the women's quarters
of King Wonderful Adornment were all capable of accepting and upholding
the Lotus Sutra. Bodhisattva Pure Eye had long ago mastered the Dharma
flower samadhi, and Bodhisattva Pure Storehouse had already, some
hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of kalpas in the past,
mastered the samadhi of the escape from the evil realms of existence.
This was because he wished to make it possible for all living beings to
escape the evil realms. The king's consort had gained the samadhi of the
Buddhas' assembly and was capable of understanding the secret storehouse
of the Buddhas. Her two sons, as already described, had employed the
power of expedient means to improve and transform their father so that
he could acquire a mind of faith and understanding and love and delight
in the Buddha's Law.\
 \
 "Thereupon King Wonderful Adornment, accompanied by his ranks of
ministers and his attendants; his queen Pure Virtue and all the
ladies-in-waiting and attendants of the women's quarters; and the king's
two sons and their forty-two thousand attendants, all at the same time
went to where the Buddha was. Arriving there, they bowed their heads to
the ground in obeisance to his feet, circled around the Buddha three
times, and then withdrew and stood to one side.\
 \
 "At that time that Buddha preached the Law for the sake of the king,
instructing him and bringing him benefit and joy. The king was
exceedingly delighted.\
 \
 "At that time King Wonderful Adornment and his queen removed from their
necks necklaces of pearls worth hundreds and thousands and scattered
them over the Buddha. In midair the necklaces changed into a jeweled
dais with four pillars. On the dais was a large jeweled couch spread
with hundreds, thousands, ten thousands of heavenly robes. Seated
cross-legged on them was a Buddha who emitted a brilliant light.\
 \
 "At that time King Wonderful Adornment thought to himself: The Buddha's
body is rare indeed, extraordinary in dignity and adornment,
constituting a form of utmost subtlety and wonder! Then the Buddha Cloud
Thunder Sound Constellation King Flower Wisdom spoke to the four kinds
of believers, saying, 'Do you see this King Wonderful Adornment who
stands before me with his palms pressed together? In the midst of my Law
this king will become a monk, diligently practicing the Law that aids
the Buddha way. He will be able to become a Buddha. His name will be Sal
Tree King, his land will be called Great Light, and his kalpa will be
called Great Lofty King. This Buddha Sal Tree King will have an
immeasurable multitude of bodhisattvas, as well as immeasurable
voice-hearers. His land will be level and smooth. Such will be his
benefits.'\
 \
 "The king immediately turned his kingdom to his younger brother and he
himself, along with his queen, his two sons, and all their attendants,
in the midst of the Buddha's Law renounced the household life to
practice the way.\
 \
 "After the king had left the household life, for the space of
eighty-four thousand years he constantly applied himself with diligence,
practicing the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law. When his period had
passed, he gained the samadhi of the adornment of all pure benefits.
Rising into the air to the height of seven tala trees, he addressed the
Buddha saying: 'World-Honored One, these two sons of mine have carried
out the Buddha's work, employing transcendental powers and
transformations to turn my mind away from heresies, enabling me to abide
safely in the Buddha's Law, and permitting me to see the World-Honored
One. These two sons have been good friends to me. They wished to awaken
the good roots from my past existences and to enrich and benefit me, and
for that reason they were born into my household.'\
 \
 "At that time the Buddha Cloud Thunder Sound Constellation King Flower
Wisdom said to King Wonderful Adornment, 'Just so, just so. It is as you
have said. If good men and good women have planted good roots, and as a
result in existence after existence have been able to gain good friends,
then these good friends can do the Buddha's work, teaching, benefiting,
delighting, and enabling them to enter anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Great
king, you should understand that a good friend is the great cause and
condition by which one is guided and led, and which enables one to see
the Buddha and to conceive the desire for anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.
Great king, do you see these two sons? These two sons have already
offered alms to Buddhas equal in number to the sands of sixty-five
hundred, thousand, ten thousand, million nayutas of Ganges, have drawn
near to them with reverence, and in the presence of those Buddhas have
accepted and upheld the Lotus Sutra, thinking with compassion of living
beings who embrace heretical views and causing them to abide in correct
views.'\
 \
 "King Wonderful Adornment then descended from midair and said to the
Buddha, 'World-Honored One, the Thus Come One is a very rare being!
Because of his benefits and wisdom, the knob of flesh on the top of his
head illuminates all with bright light. His eyes are long, broad, and
dark blue in color. The tuft of hair in between his eyebrows, one of his
features, is white as a crystal moon. His teeth are white, even, closely
spaced, and constantly have a bright gleam. His lips are red and
beautiful as the bimba fruit.'\
 \
 "At that time King Wonderful Adornment, having praised the Buddha's
immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of benefits in
this manner, in the presence of the Thus Come One single-mindedly
pressed his palms together and addressed the Buddha once more, saying,
'World-Honored One, such a thing as this has never been known before!
The law of the Thus Come One is fully endowed with inconceivably subtle
and wonderful benefits. Where his teachings and precepts are observed
there will be tranquility and good feeling. From this day on I will no
longer follow the whims of my own mind, nor will I give way to heretical
views or to arrogance, anger, or other evil states of mind.'\
 \
 "When he had spoken these words, he bowed to the Buddha and departed."\
 \
 The Buddha said to the great assembly: "What is your opinion? Is this
King Wonderful Adornment someone unknown to you? In fact he is none
other than the present Bodhisattva Flower Virtue. And his queen Pure
Virtue is Bodhisattva Light Shining Adornment Marks who is now in the
Buddha's presence. Out of pity and compassion for King Wonderful
Adornment and his attendants, he was born in their midst. The king's
sons are the present bodhisattvas Medicine King and Medicine Superior.\
 \
 "These bodhisattvas Medicine King and Medicine Superior have already
succeeded in acquiring great benefits such as these, and in the presence
of immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of Buddhas
have planted numerous roots of virtue and acquired inconceivably good
benefits. If there are persons who are acquainted with the names of
these two bodhisattvas, the heavenly and human beings of all the world
will surely do obeisance to them."\
 \
 When the Buddha preached this chapter on the Former Affairs of King
Wonderful Adornment, eighty-four thousand persons removed themselves
from dust and defilement and with respect to the various phenomena
attained the pure Dharma eye.
