---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 12:07:29'
layout: page
slug: chapter-twenty-five-the-universal-gate-of-bodhisattva-kanzeon-avalokitesvara
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Twenty-five: The Universal Gate of Bodhisattva Kanzeon (Avalokitesvara)'
wordpress_id: '3606'
---

At that time the bodhisattva Inexhaustible Intent immediately rose from
his seat, bared his right shoulder, pressed his palms together and,
facing the Buddha, spoke these words: "World Honored One, this
Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds-- why is he called Perceiver
of the World's Sounds?"\
 \
 The Buddha said to Bodhisattva Inexhaustible Intent: "Good man, suppose
there are immeasurable hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, millions of
living beings who are undergoing various trials and suffering. If they
hear of this Bodhisattva Perceiver of the Word's Sounds and
single-mindedly call his name, then at once he will perceive the sound
of their voices and they will all gain deliverance from their trials.\
 \
 If someone, holding fast to the name of bodhisattva perceiver of the
world's sounds, should enter a great fire, the fire could not burn him.
This would come about because of this bodhisattva's authority and
supernatural power. If one were washed away by a great flood and call
upon his name, one would immediately find himself in a shallow place.\
 \
 "Suppose there were a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, a million
living beings who, seeking for gold, silver, lapis lazuli, seashell,
agate, coral, amber, pearls, and other treasures, set out on the great
sea. and suppose a fierce wind should blow their ship off course and it
drifted to the land of rakshasas demons. If among those people there is
even just one who calls the name of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's
sounds, then all those people will be delivered from their troubles with
the rakshasas. This is why he is called Perceiver of the World's
Sounds.\
 \
 "If a person who faces imminent threat of attack should call the name
of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's sounds, then the swords and
staves wielded by his attackers would instantly shatter into so many
pieces and he would be delivered.\
 \
 Thought enough yakshas and rakshasas to fill all the
thousand-million-fold world should try to come and torment a person, if
they hear him calling the name of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's
Sounds, then these evil demons will not even be able to look at him with
their evil eyes, much less do him harm.\
 \
 "Suppose, in a place filled with all the evil-hearted bandits of the
thousand-million-fold world, there is a merchant leader who is guiding a
band of merchants carrying valuable treasures over a steep and dangerous
road, and that one man shouts out these words: 'Good men, do not be
afraid! You must single-mindedly call on the name of Bodhisattva
Perceiver of the World's Sounds. This bodhisattva can grant fearlessness
to living beings. If you call his name, you will be delivered from these
evil-hearted bandits!' When the band if merchants hear this, they all
together raise their voices, saying, 'Hail to the Bodhisattva Perceiver
of the World's Sounds!' And because they call his name, they are at once
able to gain deliverance. Inexhaustible Intent, the authority and
supernatural power of the Bodhisattva and mahasattva Perceiver of the
World's Sounds are as mighty as this!\
 \
 "If there should be living beings beset by numerous lusts and cravings,
let them think with constant reverence of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the
World's Sounds and then they can shed their desires. If they have great
wrath and ire, let them think with constant reverence of Bodhisattva
Perceiver of the World's Sounds and then they can shed their ire. If
they have great ignorance and stupidity, let them think with constant
reverence of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds and they can
rid themselves of stupidity.\
 \
 "Inexhaustible Intent, the Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds
possesses great authority and supernatural powers, as I have described,
and can confer many benefits. For this reason, living beings should
constantly keep the thought of him in mind.\
 \
 "If a woman wishes to give birth to a male child, she should offer
obeisance and alms to Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds and
then she will bear a son blessed with merit, virtue, and wisdom. And if
she wishes to bear a daughter, she will bear one with al the marks of
comeliness, one who in the past planted the roots of virtue and is loved
and respected by many persons.\
 \
 "Inexhaustible Intent, the Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds
has power to do all this. If there are living beings who pay respect and
obeisance to Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds, their good
fortune will not be fleeting or vain. Therefore living beings should all
accept and uphold the name of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's
Sounds.\
 \
 "Inexhaustible Intent, suppose there is a person who accepts and
upholds the names of as many bodhisattvas as there are sands in
sixty-two million Ganges, and for as long as his present body lasts, he
offers them alms in the form of food and drink, clothing, bedding and
medicines. What is your opinion? Would this good man or good woman gain
many benefits or would he not?"\
 \
 Inexhaustible Intent replied, "They would be very many, World-Honored
One."\
 \
 The Buddha said: "Suppose also that there is a person who accepts and
upholds the name of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds and even
just once offers him obeisance and alms. The good fortune pained by
these two persons would be exactly equal and without difference. For a
hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, a million kalpas it would never be
exhausted or run out. Inexhaustible Intent, if one accepts and upholds
the name of Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds, he will gain
the benefit of merit and virtue that is as immeasurable and boundless as
this!"\
 \
 Bodhisattva Inexhaustible Intent said to the Buddha, "World-Honored
One, Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds-- how does he come and
go in this saha world? How does he preach the Law for the sake of living
beings? How does the power of expedient means apply in this case?"\
 \
 The Buddha said to Bodhisattva Inexhaustible Intent: "Good man, if
there are living beings in the land who need someone in the body of a
Buddha in order to be saved, Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds
immediately manifests himself in a Buddha body and preaches the Law for
them. If they need someone in a pratyekabuddha's body in order to be
saved, immediately he manifests a pratyekabuddha's body and preaches the
Law to them. If the need a voice-hearer to be saved, immediately he
becomes a voice-hearer and preaches the Law for them. If they need King
Brahma to be saved, immediately he becomes King Brahma and preaches the
Law for them. If they need the lord Shakra to be saved, immediately he
becomes the lord Shakra and preaches the Law for them. If they need the
heavenly beiang Freedom to be saved, immediately he becomes the heavenly
being Freedom and preaches the Law for them. If they need a great
general of heaven to be saved, immediately he becomes a great general of
heaven and preaches the Law for them. If they need Vaishravana to be
saved, immediately he becomes Vaishravana and preaches the Law for them.
If they need a petty king to be saved, immediately he becomes a petty
king and preaches the law for them.\
 \
 If they need a rich man to be saved, immediately he becomes a rich man
and preaches the Law for them. If they need a householder to be saved,
immediately he becomes a householder and preaches the Law for them. If
they need a chief minister to be saved, immediately he becomes a chief
minister and preaches the Law for them. If they need a Brahman to be
saved, immediately he becomes a Brahman and preaches the Law for them.
If they need a monk, a nun, a layman believer, or a laywoman believer
and preaches the Law for them. If they need the wife of a rich man, of a
householder, a chief minister, or a Brahman to be saved, immediately he
becomes those wives and preaches the Law for them. If they need a young
boy or a young girl and preaches the Law for them. If they need a
heavenly being, a dragon, a yaksha, a gandharva, an asura, a garuda, a
kimnara, a mahoraga, a human or a nonhuman being to be saved,
immediately he becomes all of these and preaches the Law for them. If
they need a vajra-bearing god and preaches the Law for them.\
 \
 "Inexhaustible Intent, this Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds
has succeeded in acquiring benefits such as these and. Taking on a
variety of different forms, goes about among the lands saving living
beings. For this reason you and the others should single-mindedly offer
alms to Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds can bestow
fearlessness on those who are in fearful, pressing or difficult
circumstances. That is why in this saha world everyone calls him
Bestower of Fearlessness."\
 \
 "Bodhisattva Inexhaustible Intent said to the Buddha, "World-Honored
One, now I must offer alms to Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's
Sounds."\
 \
 Then he took from his neck a necklace adorned with numerous precious
gems, worth a hundred or a thousand taels of gold, and presented it to
[the bodhisattva], saying, "Sir, please accept this necklace of precious
gems as a gift in the Dharma."\
 \
 At that time Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds was unwilling
to accept the gift.\
 \
 Inexhaustible Intent spoke once more to Bodhisattva Perceiver of the
World's Sounds, saying, "Sir, out of compassion for us, please accept
this necklace."\
 \
 Then the Buddha said to Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds,
"Out of compassion for this Bodhisattva Inexhaustible Intent and for the
four kinds of believers, the heavenly kings, dragons, yakshas,
gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoragas, human and nonhuman
beings, you should accept this necklace."\
 \
 Thereupon Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds, having
compassion for the four kinds of believers and the heavenly beings,
dragons, human and nonhuman beings and the others, accepted the necklace
and, dividing it into two parts, presented one part to Shakyamuni Buddha
and presented the other to the tower of the Buddha Many Treasures.\
 \
 [The Buddha said,] "Inexhaustible Intent, these are the kinds of freely
exercised supernatural powers that Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's
Sounds displays in his comings and goings in the saha world."\
 \
 At that time Bodhisattva Inexhaustible Intent posed this question in
verse form:\
 \
 World-Honored One replete with wonderful features,\
 I now ask you once again\
 for what reason that Buddha's son\
 is named Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds?\
 The honored One endowed with wonderful features\
 replied to Inexhaustible Intent in verse:\
 Listen to the actions of the Perceiver of Sounds,\
 how aptly he responds in various quarters.\
 His vast oath is deep as the ocean;\
 kalpas pass but it remains unfathomable.\
 He has attended many thousands and millions of Buddhas,\
 setting forth his great pure vow.\
 I will describe him in outline for you-\
 listen to his name, observe his body,\
 bear him in mind, not passing the time vainly,\
 for he can wipe out the pains of existence.\
 Suppose someone should conceive a wish to harm you,\
 should push you into a great pit of fire.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and the pit of fire will change into a pond!\
 If you should be cast adrift on the vast ocean,\
 menaced by dragons, fish and various demons,\
 think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and the billows and waves cannot drown you!\
 Suppose you are on the peak of Mount Sumeru\
 and someone pushes you off.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and you will hang in midair like the sun!\
 Suppose you are pursued by evil men\
 who wish to throw you down from a diamond mountain.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and they cannot harm a hair of you!\
 Suppose you are surrounded by evil-hearted bandits,\
 each brandishing a knife to wound you.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and at once all will be swayed by compassion!\
 Suppose you encounter trouble with the king's law,\
 face punishment, about to forfeit your life.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and the executioner's sword will be broken to bits!\
 Suppose you are imprisoned in cangue and lock,\
 hands and feet bound by fetters and chains.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and they will fall off, leaving you free!\
 Suppose with curses and various poisonous herbs\
 someone should try to injure you.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and the injury will rebound upon the originator.\
 Suppose you encounter evil rakshasas,\
 poison dragons and various demons.\
 Think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and then none of them will dare to harm you.\
 If evil beasts should encircle you,\
 their sharp fangs and claws inspiring terror,\
 think on the power of that Perceiver of sounds\
 and they will scamper away in boundless retreat.\
 If lizards, snakes, vipers, scorpions\
 threaten you with poison breath that sears like flame,\
 think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and, hearing your voice, they will flee of themselves.\
 If clouds should bring thunder, and lightning strike,\
 if hail pelts or drenching rain comes down,\
 think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and at that moment they will vanish away.\
 If living beings encounter weariness or peril,\
 immeasurable suffering pressing them down,\
 the power of the Perceiver of Sounds' wonderful wisdom\
 can save them from the sufferings of the world.\
 He is endowed with transcendental powers\
 and widely practices the expedient means of wisdom.\
 Throughout the lands in the ten directions\
 there is no region where he does not manifest himself.\
 In many different kinds of evil circumstances,\
 in the realms of hell, hungry spirits or beasts,\
 the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness and death--\
 all these he bit by bit wipes out.\
 He of the true gaze, the pure gaze,\
 the gaze of great and encompassing wisdom,\
 the gaze of pity, the gaze of compassion--\
 constantly we implore him, constantly look up in reverence.\
 His pure light, free of blemish,\
 is a sun of wisdom dispelling all darknesses.\
 He can quell the wind and fire of misfortune\
 and everywhere bring light to the world.\
 The precepts from his compassionate body shake us\
 like thunder,\
 the wonder of his pitying mind is like a great cloud.\
 He sends down the sweet dew, the Dharma rain,\
 to quench the flames of earthly desires.\
 When law suits bring you before the officials,\
 when terrified in the midst of an army,\
 think on the power of that Perceiver of Sounds\
 and hatred in all its forms will be dispelled.\
 Wonderful sound, Perceiver of the World's Sounds,\
 Brahma's sound, the sea tide sound--\
 they surpass those sounds of the world;\
 therefore you should constantly think on them\
 from thought to thought never entertaining doubt!\
 Perceiver of the World's Sounds, pure sage--\
 to those in suffering, in danger of death,\
 he can offer aid and support.\
 Endowed with all benefits,\
 he views living beings with compassionate eyes.\
 The sea of his accumulated blessings is immeasurable;\
 therefore you should bow your head to him!\
 \
 At that time the Bodhisattva Earth Holder immediately rose from his
seat, advanced, and said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, if there are
living beings who hear this chapter on Bodhisattva Perceiver of the
World's Sounds, on the freedom of his actions, his manifestation of a
universal gateway, and his transcendental powers, it should be known
that the benefits these persons gain are not few!"\
 \
 When the Buddha preached this chapter on the Universal Gateway, a
multitude of eighty-four thousand persons in the assembly all conceived
a determination to attain the unparalleled state of
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.
