---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:53:25'
layout: page
slug: chapter-nine-prophecies-conferred-on-learners-and-adepts
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Nine: Prophecies Conferred on Learners and Adepts'
wordpress_id: '3574'
---

At that time Ananda and Rahula thought to themselves, whenever we
reflect, we consider how delightful it would be if we should receive a
prophecy of enlightenment! Immediately they rose from their seats,
advanced to a position in front of the Buddha, touched their heads to
the ground and bowed to the Buddha's feet. Together they spoke to the
Buddha, saying: \
 \
 "World-Honored One, we too should have a share of this! We have put all
our trust in the Thus Come One alone, and we are well known to the
heavenly and human beings and asuras of all the world. Ananda constantly
attends the Buddha and guards and upholds the Dharma storehouse, and
Rahula is the Buddha's son. If the Buddha should bestow on us a prophecy
that we will attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, then our wishes will be
fulfilled and the longings of the multitude will likewise be satisfied."
\
 \
 At that time two thousand of the voice-hearers disciples, both learners
and adepts who had nothing who had nothing more to learn, all rose from
their seats, bared their right shoulders, advanced to a position in
front of the Buddha, pressed their palms together with a single mind
and, gazing up in reverence at the World-Honored One, repeated the wish
expressed by Ananda and Rahula and then stood to one side. \
 \
 At that time the Buddha said to Ananda: "In a future existence you will
become a Buddha with the name Mountain Sea Wisdom Unrestricted Power
King Thus Come One, worthy of offerings, of right universal knowledge,
perfect clarity and conduct, well gone, understanding the world,
unexcelled worthy, and trainer of people, teacher of heavenly and human
beings, Buddha, World-Honored One. You will offer alms to sixty-two
million Buddhas and will guard and uphold their Dharma storehouses, and
after that you will attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. You will teach and
convert bodhisattvas as numerous as twenty thousand ten thousand million
Ganges sands and will cause them to attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.
Your land will be named Ever Standing Victory Banner, its soil will be
clean and pure and made of lapis lazuli. The kalpa will be named
Wonderful Sound Filling Everywhere. The life span of that Buddha will be
immeasurable thousands, ten thousands millions of asamkhyas of
kalpas-though men should calculate and reckon thousands, ten thousands,
millions of immeasurable asamkhyas of kalpas, they could never ascertain
the life span of the Buddha and the Counterfeit Law will endure in the
world for twice the time of the correct law. Ananda, this Mountain Sea
Wisdom Unrestricted Power King Buddha will be praised alike by Thus Come
Ones of the ten directions who are equal in number to immeasurable
thousands, ten thousands, millions of Ganges sands, and they will extol
his blessings." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 I now say to the monks that\
 Ananda, upholder of the Law,\
 will give alms to the Buddhas\
 and after will achieve correct enlightenment.\
 His name will be Mountain Sea Wisdom\
 Unrestricted Power King Buddha,\
 His land will be clean and pure,\
 named ever Standing Victory Banner.\
 He will teach and convert bodhisattvas\
 in numbers like Ganges sands.\
 This Buddha will possess great dignity and virtue,\
 his renown will fill the ten directions.\
 His life span will be immeasurable\
 because he takes pity on living beings.\
 His Correct Law, twice that again.\
 His Counterfeit Law, twice again.\
 As numerous as Ganges sands\
 will be the countless living beings\
 who in the midst of the Buddha's Law\
 will plant causes and conditions leading to the Buddha way.\
 \
 At that time in the assembly eight thousand bodhisattvas who had newly
conceived the determination to attain enlightenment all thought to
themselves, We have never heard of even a great bodhisattva receiving a
prophecy such as this. For what reason should these voice-hearers
receive such a prediction? \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, knowing the thought that was in the
mind of these bodhisattvas, said to them: "Good men, when Ananda and I
were at the place of Void King Buddha, we both at the same time
conceived the determination to attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Ananda
constantly delighted in wide knowledge [of the Law], I constantly put
forth diligent effort. Therefore I have already succeeded in attaining
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, while Ananda guards and upholds my Law. And he
will likewise guard the Dharma storehouses of the Buddha of future
existences and will teach, convert and bring success to the multitude of
bodhisattvas. Such was his original vow, and therefore he has received
this prophecy." \
 \
 When Ananda in the presence of the Buddha heard this prophecy delivered
to him and heard of the land and adornments he was to receive, all that
he had vowed to achieve was realized and his mind was filled with great
joy, for he had gained what he had never had before. Immediately he
recalled to mind the Dharma storehouses of immeasurable thousands, ten
thousands, millions of Buddhas of the past, and he could fully
comprehend them without hindrance, as though he had just now heard them.
He also recalled his original vow. \
 \
 At that time Ananda spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 The World-Honored One, very rarely met with,\
 has caused me to recall the past,\
 the Law of immeasurable Buddhas,\
 as though I had heard it today.\
 Now I have no more doubts\
 but dwell securely in the Buddha way.\
 As an expedient means I act as attendant,\
 guarding and upholding the Law of the Buddhas.\
 \
 At that time the Buddha said to Rahula: In a future existence you will
become a Buddha with the name Stepping on Seven Treasure Flowers Thus
Come One, worthy of offerings, of right and universal knowledge, perfect
clarity and conduct, well gone, understanding the world, unexcelled
worthy, trainer of people, teacher of heavenly and human beings, Buddha,
World-Honored One. You will offer alms to Buddhas and Thus Come Ones as
numerous as the dust particles of ten worlds. In all cases you will be
the eldest son of those Buddhas, just as you are my son now. The
adornments of the land of Stepping on Seven Treasure Flowers Buddha, the
number of kalpas in his life span, the disciples he converts, his
Correct Law and Counterfeit Law will not differ from those of the Thus
Come One Mountain Sea Wisdom Unrestricted Power King. You will be the
eldest son of that Buddha, and after that you will attain
anuttara-samyak-sambodhi." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying: \
 \
 When I was crown prince\
 Rahula was my eldest son.\
 Now that I have gained the Buddha way\
 he receives the Dharma and is my Dharma son.\
 In existences to come\
 he will see immeasurable millions of Buddhas.\
 \
 As eldest son to all of them,\
 with a single mind he will seek the Buddha way.\
 The covert actions of Rahula\
 I alone am capable of knowing.\
 He manifests himself as my eldest son,\
 showing himself to living beings.\
 With immeasurable millions, thousands, ten thousands\
 of blessings beyond count,\
 he dwells securely in the Buddha's Law\
 and thereby seeks the unsurpassed way.\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One observed the two thousand learners
and adepts, mild and gentle in will, serenely clean and pure, gazing at
the Buddha with a single mind. The Buddha said to Ananda, "Do you see
these two thousand learners and adepts?" \
 \
 "Yes, I see them." \
 \
 "Ananda, these persons will offer alms to Buddhas and Thus Come Ones
equal in number to the dust particles of fifty worlds, paying honor and
reverence to them, guarding and upholding their Dharma storehouses. In
their final existence they will all at the same time succeed in becoming
Buddhas in lands in the ten directions. All will have the identical
designation, being called Jewel Sign Thus Come One, worthy of offerings,
of right and universal knowledge, perfect clarity and conduct, well
gone, understanding the world, unexcelled worthy, trainer of people,
teacher of heavenly and human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One. Their
life span will be one kalpa, and the adornment of their lands, their
voice-hearers and bodhisattvas, Correct Law and Counterfeit Law will be
all cases the same." \
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning in
verse form, saying:\
 \
 These two thousand voice-hearers\
 who now stand in my presence-\
 on all of them I bestow a prophecy\
 that in a future existence they will become Buddhas.\
 The Buddhas to whom they offer alms\
 will be numerous as the dust particles described above.\
 They will guard and uphold the Dharma storehouses\
 and after that will gain correct enlightenment.\
 Each will have a land in one of the ten directions\
 and all will share the same name and designation.\
 All at the same time will sit in the place of practice\
 and thereby will gain proof of unsurpassed wisdom.\
 All will be named Jewel Sign\
 and their lands and disciples,\
 their Correct Law and Counterfeit Law\
 will all be identical and without difference.\
 All will employ transcendental powers\
 to save living beings in the ten directions.\
 Their renown will spread everywhere around\
 and in due time they will enter nirvana.\
 \
 At that time, when the two thousand learners and adepts heard the
Buddha bestow this prophecy, they danced for joy ad spoke in verse form,
saying:\
 \
 World-Honored One, bright lamp of wisdom,\
 we hear your voice bestowing this prophecy\
 and our hearts are filled with joy\
 as though we were bathed in sweet dew!
