---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-14 11:55:24'
layout: page
slug: chapter-eleven-the-emergence-of-the-treasure-tower
status: publish
title: 'Chapter Eleven: The Emergence of the Treasure Tower'
wordpress_id: '3578'
---

At that time in the Buddha's presence there was a tower adorned with the
seven treasures, five hundred yojanas in height and two hundred and
fifty yojanas in width and depth, that rose up out of the earth and
stood suspended in the air. Various kinds of precious objects adorned
it. It had five thousand railings, a thousand, ten thousand rooms, and
numberless streamers and banners decorated it. Festoons of jewels hung
down and ten thousand million jeweled bells were suspended from it. All
four sides emitted a fragrance of tamalapatra and sandalwood that
pervaded the whole world. Its banners and canopies were made of the
seven treasures, namely, gold, silver, lapis Lazuli, seashell, agate,
pearl, and carnelian, and it as so high it reached to the heavenly
places of the Four Heavenly Kings. The gods of the Trayastrimsha heaven
rained down heavenly mandarava flowers as an offering to the treasure
tower, and the other heavenly beings and the dragons, yakshas,
gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoragas, human and nonhuman
beings, an assembly of thousands, ten thousands, millions, offered all
kinds of flowers, incense, necklaces, streamers, canopies and music as
alms to the treasure tower, paying it reverence, honor and praise.\
 \
 At that time a loud voice issued from the treasure tower, speaking
words of praise: "Excellent, excellent! Shakyamuni, World-Honored One,
that you can take a great wisdom of equality, a Law to instruct the
bodhisattvas, guarded and kept in mind by the Buddhas, the Lotus Sutra
of the Wonderful law, and preach it for the sake of the great assembly!
It is as you say, as you say. Shakyamuni, World-Honored One, all that
you have expounded is the truth!"\
 \
 At that time the four kinds of believers saw the great treasure tower
suspended in the air, and they heard the voice that issued from the
tower. All experienced the joy of the Law, marveling at this thing they
had never known before. They rose from their seats, pressed their palms
together in reverence, and then retired to one side.\
 \
 At that time there was a bodhisattva and mahasattva named Great Joy of
Preaching, who understood the doubts that were in the minds of the
heavenly and human beings, asuras and other beings of all the world. He
said to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, for what reason has this
treasure tower risen up out of the earth? And why does this voice issue
from its midst?"\
 \
 At that time the Buddha said: "Bodhisattva Great Joy of Preaching, in
the treasure tower is the complete body of a Thus Come One. Long ago, an
immeasurable thousand, ten thousand million of asamkhyas of worlds to
the east, in a land called Treasure Purity, there was a Buddha named
Many Treasures. When this Buddha was originally carrying out the
bodhisattva way, he made a great vow, saying, "If after I have become a
Buddha and entered extinction, in the lands in the ten directions there
is any place where the Lotus Sutra is preached, then my funerary tower,
in order that I may listen to the sutra, will come forth and appear in
that spot to testify to the sutra and praise its excellence.'\
 \
 "When that Buddha had finished carrying out the Buddha way and was on
the point of passing into extinction, in the midst of the great assembly
of heavenly and human beings he said to the monks, 'After I have passed
into extinction, if there are those who wish to offer alms to my
complete body, then they should erect a great tower.' That Buddha,
through his transcendental powers and the power of his vow, insures
that, throughout the worlds in the ten directions, no matter in what
place, if there are those who preach the Lotus Sutra, this treasure
tower will in all cases come forth and appear in their presence, and his
complete body will be in the tower, speaking words of praise and saying,
Excellent, excellent!\
 \
 "Great Joy of Preaching, now this tower of the Thus Come One Many
Treasures, because it heard the preaching of the Lotus Sutra, has come
forth out of the ground and speaks words of praise, saying, Excellent,
Excellent!"\
 \
 At this time Bodhisattva Great Joy of Preaching, knowing the
supernatural powers of the Thus Come One, spoke to the Buddha, saying,
"World-Honored One, we wish to see the body of this Buddha."\
 \
 The Buddha said to the bodhisattva and mahasattva Great Joy of
Preaching, "This Many Treasures Buddha has taken a profound vow, saying,
'When my treasure tower, in order to listen to the Lotus Sutra comes
forth into the presence of one of the Buddhas, if there should be those
who wish me to show my body to the four kinds of believers, then let the
various Buddhas who are emanations of that Buddha and who are preaching
the Law in the worlds in the ten directions all return and gather around
that Buddha in a single spot. Only when that has been done will my body
become visible.' Great Joy Preaching, I will now gather together the
various Buddhas that are emanations of my body and that are preaching
the Law in the worlds in the ten directions."\
 \
 Great Joy of Preaching said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I and
the others also wish to see these Buddhas that are emanations of the
World-Honored One, and to make obeisance to them and offer alms."\
 \
 At that time the Buddha emitted a ray of light from the tuft of white
hair [between his eyebrows], immediately making visible the Buddhas in
the eastern region in lands as numerous as five hundred ten thousand
million nayutas of Ganges sands. The earth in all these lands was made
of crystal, and the lands were adorned with jeweled trees and jeweled
robes. Countless thousands, ten thousands, millions of bodhisattvas
filled them, and everywhere were hung jeweled curtains, with jeweled
nets covering them over. The Buddhas in these lands preached the various
doctrines of the Law with great and wonderful voices, and one could see
immeasurable thousands, ten thousands, millions of bodhisattvas filling
all these lands and preaching the Law for the assembly. In the southern,
western and northern regions as well, and in the four intermediate
quarters and up and down, wherever the beam from the tuft of white hair,
a characteristic feature of the Buddha, shone, the same was true.\
 \
 At that time the Buddhas of the ten directions each spoke to his
multitude of bodhisattvas, saying, "Good men, now I must go to the saha
world, to the place where Shakyamuni Buddha is, and also offer alms to
the treasure tower of Many Treasures Thus Come One."\
 \
 The saha world thereupon immediately changed into a place of cleanness
and purity. The ground was made of lapis lazuli, jeweled trees adorned
it, and ropes of gold marked off the eight highways. There were no
villages, towns or cities, great seas of rivers, mountains, streams or
forests; great jeweled incense was burning there and mandarava flowers
covered the ground all over. Jeweled nets and curtains were spread
above, hung with jeweled bells, and the members of this assembly alone
were gathered there, all other heavenly and human beings having been
moved to another region.\
 \
 At that time the Buddhas, each with a great bodhisattva to act as his
attendant, arrived in the saha world and proceeded to a position beneath
one of the jeweled trees. Each of these jeweled trees was five hundred
yojanas high and adorned with branches, leaves, flowers and fruit in due
proportion. Under all the jeweled trees were lion seats five yojanas in
height, and these too were decorated with large jewels. At that time
each of the Buddhas took one of these seats, seating himself in
cross-legged position. In this way the seats were filled throughout the
thousand-million-fold world, but still there was no end even to the
emanations of Shakyamuni Buddha arriving from merely one direction.\
 \
 At that time Shakyamuni Buddha, wishing to provide space for all the
Buddhas that were emanations of his body, in addition transformed two
hundred ten thousand million nayutas of lands in each of the eight
directions, making them all clean and pure and without hells, hungry
spirits, beasts or asuras. He also moved all their heavenly and human
beings to another region. The ground in these lands that he had
transformed was also made of lapis lazuli, Jeweled trees adorned them,
each tree five hundred yojanas high and adorned with branches, leaves,
flowers and flowers and fruit in due proportion. There were jeweled lion
seats under all the trees, five yojanas in height and ornamented with
various kinds of treasures, these lands too were without great seas or
rivers, or any kingly ranges of mountains such as the Muchilinda
Mountains, Mahamuchilinda Mountains, Iron Encircling Mountains, Great
Iron Encircling mountains, or Mount Sumeru. The whole area comprised a
single Buddha land, a jeweled region level and smooth. Curtains
crisscrossed with festoons of jewels were spread everywhere, banners and
canopies hung down, great jeweled incense burned, and heavenly jeweled
flowers covered the ground all around.\
 \
 Shakyamuni Buddha, in order to provide seats for all the Buddhas that
were arriving, once more transformed two hundred ten thousand million
nayutas of lands in each of the eight directions, making them all clean
and pure and without hells, hungry spirits, beasts or asuras. He also
moved all the heavenly and human beings to another region. The ground in
these lands that he had transformed was likewise made of lapis lazuli.
Jeweled trees adorned the lands, each tree five hundred yojanas in
height and adorned with branches, leaves, flowers and fruit in due
proportion. There were jeweled lion seats under all the trees, five
yojanas in height and ornamented with great jewels, these lands too were
without great seas or rivers, or any kingly ranges such as the
Muchilinda Mountains, Great Mahamuchilinda Mountains, iron Encircling
Mountains, Great Iron Encircling Mountains, or Mount Sumeru, the whole
area comprising a single Buddha land, a jeweled region level and smooth.
Curtains crisscrossed with festoons of jewels were spread everywhere,
banners and canopies hung down, great jeweled incense burned, and
heavenly jeweled flowers covered the ground all around.\
 \
 At that time the emanations of Shakyamuni Buddha from the eastern
region, Buddhas in lands equal in number to hundreds, thousands, ten
thousands, millions of nayutas of Ganges sands, each preaching the Law,
had assembled there. And bit by bit the Buddhas from the ten directions
all came and assembled in this way and were seated in the eight
directions. At this time each of the directions was filled with Buddhas,
Thus Come Ones, in four hundred ten thousand million nayutas of lands.\
 \
 At that time the Buddhas, each seated on a lion seat under one of the
jeweled trees, all dispatched their attendants to go and greet
Shakyamuni Buddha. Each Buddha presented his attendant with a handful of
jeweled flowers and said, "Good man, you must go to Mount Gridhrakuta to
the place where Shakyamuni Buddha is and speak to him as I instruct you.
Say, 'Are your illnesses few, and your worries few? In spirit and vigor
are you well and happy? And are the bodhisattvas and voice-hearers all
well and at peace?' Then take these jeweled flowers and scatter them
over the Buddha as an offering, and say, 'The Buddha So-and-so would
like to participate in the opening of this treasure tower.'\
 \
 All the Buddhas dispatched their attendants to speak in this manner. At
that time Shakyamuni Buddha saw the Buddhas that were his emanations all
assembled, each sitting on a lion seat, and heard all these Buddhas say
that they wished to participate in the opening of the treasure tower.
Immediately he rose from his seat and stationed himself in midair. All
the four kinds of believers likewise stood up, pressed their palms
together and gazed at the Buddha with a single mind.\
 \
 Shakyamuni Buddha with the fingers of his right hand then opened the
door of the tower of seven treasures. A loud sound issued from it, like
the sound of a lock and crossbar being removed from a great city gate,
and at once all the members of the assembly caught sight of Many
Treasures Thus Come One seated on a lion seat inside the treasure tower,
his body whole and unimpaired, sitting as thought engaged in meditation.
And they heard him say, "excellent, excellent, Shakyamuni Buddha! You
have preached this Lotus Sutra in a spirited manner. I have come here in
order that I may hear this sutra."\
 \
 At that time the four kinds of believers, observing this Buddha who had
passed into extinction immeasurable thousands, ten thousands, millions
of kalpas in the past speaking in this way, marveled at what they had
never known before and took the masses of heavenly jeweled flowers and
scattered them over Many Treasures Buddha and Shakyamuni Buddha.\
 \
 At that time Many Treasures Buddha offered half of his seat in the
treasure tower to Shakyamuni Buddha, saying, "Shakyamuni Buddha, sit
here!" Shakyamuni Buddha at once entered the tower and took half of the
seat, seating himself in cross-legged position.\
 \
 At that time the members of the great assembly, seeing the two Thus
Come Ones seated cross-legged on the lion seat in the tower of seven
treasures, all thought to themselves, These Buddhas are seated high up
and far away! If only the Thus Come Ones would employ their
transcendental powers to enable all of us to join them there in the
air!\
 \
 Immediately Shakyamuni Buddha used his transcendental powers to lift
the members of the great assembly up into the air. And in a loud voice
he addressed all the four kinds of believers, saying, "Who is capable of
broadly preaching the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law in this saha
world? Now is the time to do so, for before long the Thus Come One will
enter nirvana. the Buddha wishes to entrust this Lotus Sutra of the
Wonderful Law to someone so that it may be preserved."\
 \
 At that time the World-Honored One, wishing to state his meaning once
more, spoke in verse form, saying:\
 \
 This holy lord, this World-Honored One,\
 though he passed into extinction long ago,\
 still seats himself in the treasure tower,\
 coming here for the sake of the Law.\
 You people, why then do you not also\
 strive for the sake of the Law?\
 This Buddha passed into extinction\
 an endless number of kalpas ago,\
 but in many places he comes to listen to the Law\
 because such opportunities are hard to encounter.\
 This Buddha originally made a vow, saying,\
 "After I have passed into extinction,\
 wherever I may go, in whatever place,\
 my constant aim will be to hear the Law!"\
 In addition, these emanations of my body,\
 Buddhas in immeasurable numbers\
 like Ganges sands,\
 have come, desiring to hear the Law,\
 and so they may see Many Treasures Thus Come One\
 who has passed into extinction.\
 \
 Each has abandoned his wonderful land,\
 as well as his host disciples,\
 the heavenly and human beings, dragons and spirits,\
 and all the offerings they give him,\
 and has come to this place on purpose\
 to make certain the Law will long endure.\
 In order to seat these Buddhas\
 I have employed transcendental powers,\
 moving immeasurable multitudes,\
 causing lands to be clean and pure,\
 leading each of these Buddhas\
 to the foot of a jeweled tree,\
 adorned as lotus blossoms\
 adorn a clear cool pond.\
 Beneath these jeweled trees\
 are lion seats,\
 and the Buddhas seat themselves on them,\
 adorning them with their brilliance\
 like a huge torch burning\
 in the darkness of the night.\
 A wonderful incense exudes from their bodies,\
 pervading the lands in the ten directions.\
 Living beings are wrapped in the aroma,\
 unable to restrain their joy,\
 as though a great wind\
 were tossing the branches of small trees.\
 Through this expedient means\
 they make certain that the Law will long endure.\
 So I say to the great assembly:\
 After I have passed into extinction,\
 who can guard and uphold,\
 read and recite this sutra?\
 Now in the presence of the Buddha\
 let him come forward and speak his vow!\
 This Many Treasures Buddha,\
 though he passed into extinction long ago,\
 because of his great vow\
 roars the lion's roar.\
 \
 Many Treasures Thus Come One, I myself,\
 and these emanation Buddhas who have gathered there,\
 surely know this is our aim.\
 You sons of the Buddha,\
 who can guard the Law?\
 Let him make a great vow\
 to ensure that it will long endure!\
 He who is capable of guarding\
 the Law of this sutra\
 will thereby have offered alms\
 to me and to Many Treasures.\
 This Many Treasures Buddha\
 dwelling in his treasure tower\
 journeys constantly throughout the ten directions\
 for the sake of this sutra.\
 One who guards this sutra will also have offered alms\
 to the emanation Buddhas who have come here\
 adorning and making brilliant\
 all the various worlds.\
 If one preaches this sutra,\
 he will be able to see me\
 and Many treasures Thus Come One\
 and these emanation Buddhas.\
 All you good men,\
 each of you must consider carefully!\
 This is a difficult matter-\
 it is proper you should make a great vow.\
 The other sutras\
 number as many as Ganges sands,\
 but though you expound those sutras,\
 that is not worth regarding as difficult.\
 If you were to seize Mount Sumeru\
 and fling it far off\
 to the measureless Buddha lands,\
 that too would not be difficult.\
 If you used the toe of your foot\
 to move a thousand-million-fold world,\
 booting it far away to other lands,\
 that too would not be difficult.\
 If you stood in the Summit of Being heaven\
 and for the sake of the assembly\
 preached countless other sutras,\
 that too would not be difficult.\
 But if after the Buddha has entered extinction ,\
 in the time of evil,\
 you can preach this sutra,\
 that will be difficult indeed!\
 If there were a person\
 who took the empty sky in his hand\
 and walked all around with it,\
 that would not be difficult.\
 But if after I have passed into extinction\
 one can write out and embrace this sutra\
 and cause others to write it out,\
 that will be difficult indeed!\
 If one took the great earth,\
 placed it on his toenail,\
 and ascended with it to the Brahma heaven,\
 that would not be difficult.\
 But if after the Buddha has passed into extinction,\
 in the time of evil,\
 one can even for a little while read this sutra,\
 that will be difficult indeed!\
 If , when the fires come at the end of the kalpa,\
 one can load dry grass on his back\
 and enter the fire without being burned,\
 that would not be difficult.\
 But after I have passed into extinction\
 if one can embrace this sutra\
 and expound it to even one person,\
 that will be difficult indeed!\
 If one were to embrace this storehouse\
 of eighty-four thousand doctrines,\
 the twelve divisions of the sutras,\
 and expound it to others,\
 causing listeners\
 to acquire the six transcendental powers-\
 though one could do that,\
 that would not be difficult.\
 But after I have entered extinction\
 if one can listen to and accept this sutra\
 and ask about its meaning,\
 that will be difficult indeed!\
 If a person expounds the Law,\
 allowing thousands, ten thousands, millions,\
 immeasurable number of living beings\
 equal to Ganges sands\
 to become arhats\
 endowed with the six transcendental powers,\
 though one might confer such benefits\
 that would not be difficult.\
 But after I have entered extinction\
 if one can honor and embrace\
 a sutra such as this one,\
 that will be difficult indeed!\
 For the sake of the Buddha way\
 in immeasurable numbers of lands\
 from the beginning until now\
 I have widely preached many sutras,\
 and among them\
 this sutra is foremost.\
 If one can uphold this,\
 he will be upholding the Buddha's body.\
 All you good men,\
 after I have entered extinction\
 who can accept and uphold,\
 read and recite this sutra?\
 Now in the presence of the Buddha\
 let him come forward and speak his vow!\
 This sutra is hard to uphold;\
 if one can uphold it even for a short while\
 I will surely rejoice\
 and so will the other Buddhas.\
 A person who can do this\
 wins the admiration of the Buddhas.\
 This is what is meant by valor,\
 this is what is meant by diligence.\
 This is what is called observing the precepts\
 and practicing dhuta.\
 This way one will quickly attain\
 the unsurpassed Buddha way.\
 And if in future existences\
 one can read and uphold this sutra,\
 he will be a true son of the Buddha,\
 dwelling in a land spotless and good.\
 If after the Buddha has passed into extinction\
 one can understand the meaning of this sutra,\
 he will be the eyes of the world\
 for heavenly and human beings.\
 If in that fearful age\
 one can preach this sutra for even a moment,\
 he will deserve to receive alms\
 from all heavenly and human beings.
