---
author: admin
date: '2002-04-09 13:31:00'
layout: post
slug: lj-entries
status: publish
title: Entries
wordpress_id: '781'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

A friend or two have pointed out that I haven't been posting as much
recently, which is true. I haven't had as much to say recently as at
other times. Life is hardly perfect but it is going better in many ways
than it has been. R and I are spending a bit of time together and in
communication much of the time when we cannot see each other. We still
don't have any idea of where things are going, if they are really
"going" anywhere per se but I think that we're both pretty happy with
the current turn of events. I haven't felt inclined to write a lot about
this as it is, for the most part, pretty private and probably pretty
boring for others to read. Other than that, I've been spending quite a
bit of time doing my fire stuff and reading. We have a show this
Saturday (7:30 PM and 9:00 PM in Ballard). We have practice twice this
week plus I had my normal Monday fire class. Even if practice is only an
hour or so, fitting it into my evening effectively makes that evening
not one where I'm going to go out and do a lot. I've also been feeling a
bit distracted at work recently. I have longstanding work stress issues
that I've mostly dealt with but which get brought up if I feel like I'm
not getting things done there. Because of this, I've started making a
point to myself that I won't read blogs during the day when I'm at work
as it is far too easy to get distracted by it and not get any real work
done. I think most of us will understand what I'm saying. I probably
will read at work occasionally but I'm trying to make a point of not
doing a lot of web surfing there. I answer my e-mail but that's
partially because it is the only chance I get to exchange things with
people. I've been contemplating physical fitness a bit as well. When R
and I broke up, I began working out on a regular basis. Part of this was
a desire to undergo a lifestyle change and start taking better care of
my physical self. Part of it was a way of dealing with stress since, as
I have said, I have stress issues and anxiety. I quit going reliably
about a month ago for a number of reasons. Most of it had to do with
timing as I had been going early in the morning and I **really** am not
a morning person. This was a constant struggle. Part of it was also that
I was doing a lot of stuff outside of work and felt that I didn't have
the time. I need to get out of this mindset and get back in the gym. I
felt better with even the low end exercise that I was going and I'm
contemplating beginning some kind of yoga for health, flexibility and
strength. Part of what draws me to yoga is that once I learn how to do
the basics, I really can practice on my own wherever I happen to be
(like at home). ***Yoga advice from people would be welcome.*** I'm also
thinking of actually buying a weight bench and free weights if I can be
sure that I can fit them into my rather small apartment. I've never done
any weight training but my uncle Karl, who I was very close to when I
was younger, did it a lot and I can see a lot of clear benefits to doing
it. I get bored at home sometime and wouldn't mind something much more
physical than reading that I can still do within my home. Putting a
movie on the TV (which I use for nothing else) and lifting strikes me as
a sensible solution... Anyway, that's kind of my update for everyone.
Sorry to have been so quiet. I'm figuring out some life stuff, as
always, and it is quite a process.
