---
author: admin
date: '2002-09-06 15:40:00'
layout: post
slug: the-dangers-of-mediation
status: publish
title: The "Dangers of Meditation"
wordpress_id: '940'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
---

Gee, this seems a bit overblown... From
[sfweekly.com](http://sfweekly.com) Originally published by *SF Weekly*
Aug 28, 2002 Â©2002 [New Times, Inc.](http://www.newtimes.com) All rights
reserved. Warning: Meditating may be hazardous to your health By SANDY
BRUNDAGE Karen Long (a pseudonym), in her mid-20s, turned to meditation
as a way to feel connected. "I wanted to experience that 'oneness with
the universe,'" she says. At a nondenominational San Francisco temple,
she hooked up with a group of women practicing a hodgepodge of
relaxation****techniques, drawn from books and discussions. Long spent
one to two hours a day meditating over the next three years. "Then I
began hearing voices," she says. "I heard profound messages. The other
people thought it was a sign of enlightenment. Some people at the temple
told me that I had 'contacted a spiritual guide.' During my normal awake
hours, I found myself feeling spacey sometimes." Unconvinced that aural
hallucinations were a sign from God, Long quit meditating. The voices
stopped. Long's experience isn't unique. Researchers have known for 30
years that meditating can have adverse health effects on some people,
inducing psychological and physical problems ranging from muscle spasms
to hallucinations. But around the Bay Area, eyes seem closed to the
data. "A lot of people do experience negative side effects," says Dr.
Maggie Phillips, the director of the California Institute of Clinical
Hypnosis and a licensed psychologist in Oakland who teaches workshops to
colleagues around the world on the proper applications of relaxation
therapies. "I've had people that went to these five- to eight-day-long
retreats, and they were practically basket cases when they came out the
other end. And they're told, "You just have to be more patient.' A lot
of spiritual teachers don't know how to look at the internal dynamics
and how they interact with types of relaxation and meditation." Just as
some people are allergic to penicillin, some people react badly to
meditation. Billed as a "one size fits all" technique for
self-improvement and even healing, meditation is packaged in a hundred
different ways. Mantra meditators chant a phrase with numbing
repetition. Others practice walking meditation, or empty-mind
meditation, sweeping the mind clean of thought. The harmful effects
aren't limited to one specific technique or even long retreats. Those
effects can include facial tics, insomnia, spacing out, and even
psychotic breakdowns. Dr. Margaret Singer, clinical psychologist
emeritus at Berkeley, with research partner Dr. Janja Lalich, collected
case histories from 70 clients seeking treatment for problems that began
during meditation practice. Their research presents several examples of
these symptoms and notes that prior to meditating, none of the patients
had individual or family histories of mental disorders: - A 36-year-old
business executive now lives off welfare as a result of the relentless
anxiety attacks and blackouts he suffered after taking up meditation.
"Everything gets in through my senses," he told Singer. - A young woman
watched rooms fill with orange fog when she "spaced out" at random
moments. - A 26-year-old man was overwhelmed by rage and sexual urges
whenever he went out in public, driving him to stay home to avoid these
episodes. Singer and Lalich point out that most people never have
problems with meditation. The danger for those who do is that many
instructors call the problems a welcome sign of enlightenment, as in
Long's case, or proof of the student's insincere effort. In either
situation, teachers encourage the student to meditate longer. One former
mantra meditator, who did not want his named used, called it "being
strangled by concepts." After increasingly frequent panic attacks, he
abandoned mantra meditation in favor of informal, unstructured
contemplation and a Paxil prescription. The tricks played by the
meditating mind are based in physiology. Over the past year Dr. Andrew
Newberg of the University of Pennsylvania scanned the brains of eight
longtime practitioners of Buddhist meditation, snapping images of blood
flow within the brain while they were meditating and comparing them with
images taken when they were not. The scans tracked increased blood flow
to the frontal lobe -- used for concentration and focusing -- during
meditation. But blood flow to the parietal lobe, which calculates the
boundaries of your body in relation to its environment -- "You are not
the chair, you are sitting on the chair, the chair is on the floor" --
decreased. Other parts of the brain also activate during meditation --
the limbic system, which is the heart of emotion and memory, and core
areas that control heart rate, blood pressure, and arousal. These
results support what other researchers have discovered about the side
effects meditation can cause. Dr. Michael Persinger, a psychologist at
Laurentian University in Canada, found in 1993 that meditation induces
epilepsylike brain seizures in some people. His study of 1,081 students
showed that the 221 meditators among them had a higher rate of
hallucinating floating spots of light, hearing voices, and even feeling
the floor shake. Other studies reported that meditators complained of
feeling emotionally dead and seeing the environment as unreal,
two-dimensional, amorphous. Those results aren't surprising if
meditation reduces blood flow to the parietal lobe. In longtime
meditators, unreality can strike spontaneously. Singer describes it as
"involuntary meditation." One of her patients took anti-seizure
medication for 25 years after quitting meditative practice to regain
control of his mind. Other side effects fall under the paradoxical
umbrella of "relaxation-induced anxiety," or RIA. Instead of relaxing
during meditation, RIA sufferers feel distressed. Psychologists at
Virginia Commonwealth University monitored 30 chronically anxious people
during guided meditation. Seventeen percent indicated that their anxiety
got worse. A previous study led by Dr. Frederick Heide at Pennsylvania
State University reported that the same happened to 54 percent of the
subjects. Symptoms of RIA include panic attacks, sweating, a pounding
heart, spasms, odd tingling sensations, and bursts of uncontrollable
laughter or tears. RIA can also aggravate conditions, such as
schizophrenia, depression, asthma, and bleeding ulcers, that were
previously stable. What physiological changes explain RIA? During
meditation, the brain releases serotonin. People with mild depression
might enjoy the increased levels of serotonin because the
neurotransmitter can ease their mood. Drugs like Prozac mimic this
effect. However, too much serotonin can cause all of the symptoms of
RIA, according to Dr. Solomon Snyder, head of Neuroscience at Johns
Hopkins University. In some cases of schizophrenia, an excess of
serotonin coupled with meditation can drop-kick someone into psychosis.
"Most people, when you're working with anxiety, the treatment of choice
is relaxation," says the California Institute of Clinical Hypnosis'
Phillips. "But if you have people that get easily overwhelmed and may
not even know what it's about, don't even have words to go with it, you
have to avoid hypnosis, relaxation, meditation until you teach them how
to handle what comes up." Meditation is a huge industry in San
Francisco. We asked 14 Bay Area instructors, chosen at random from
different fields of meditation, if they inform students about the
possible side effects. Only three of the teachers knew what we were
talking about. Of the remaining 11, Sam Geppi of S.F. Yoga gave a
typical reply: "Negative side effects from meditation? There really are
none. Meditation is just about going within, toward what is real. There
is nothing 'created' through meditation. We create our problems and
negative side effects more by escaping into the world, escaping from
meditation. Meditation is a long-overdue look within. Sometimes a
student will discuss their initial fear of the inner void once the space
and depth of being is first encountered, or that they feel like they are
going crazy. I simply tell them, 'Meditation is not making you crazy. It
is making you aware that you are already crazy.'" Lalich, now a
sociologist specializing in psychological manipulation at California
State University in Chico, says, "The problem is that everyone thinks
that meditation is great for everybody, and people are always surprised
to learn that it can cause problems. Certainly there's plenty of context
where it's completely harmless, but it's like driving a car -- people
don't think, 'Oh, I'm the one that's going to have an accident.'" Lalich
hopes that 30 years of research will finally open our eyes. "If you were
going to buy a car you'd look at *Consumer Reports*. It's the same thing
-- you're talking about your body and your mind; you should be as
cautious."
