---
author: admin
date: '2002-06-26 01:41:00'
layout: post
slug: the-black-sun-gathering-report
status: publish
title: The Black Sun Gathering Report
wordpress_id: '861'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

So, R and I went to the Black Sun Gathering this weekend. R had to work
on Saturday for a little while and I didn't want to go up Friday night
so we wound up arriving around 3:00 on Saturday afternoon. The site was
beautiful, a lake owned by a nudist group about an hour from Seattle.
The nudists were out but were sparesely scattered and it was basically a
private campground/retreat area for them. Other than the occasional
naked older person, the only noted effect of the nudist park aspect was
that people tended to be naked when swimming at the lake or half naked
otherwise. The event itself seemed a bit disorganized. This site was,
from what I can gather, the backup of the backup site so I think things
wound up there at the last minute. There were three "stages"
(performance areas) but they were in a line following the road up and
around the lake so none of them were within ear shot of one another. I
think this had the effect of keeping most people at one of them and not
circulating much. There wasn't a posted schedule and it became clear
pretty quickly that the original schedule (which I never saw since I
didn't actually *buy* a ticket) was completely off. R and I found a
secluded spot and set up camp. We ran into our friends who were doing
the organizing for the event, wandered around a while and then had a
practice for our ritual, slated for midnight. We checked out the stages
and such. Near midnight, we attended the **Mystery School** ritual done
by the Oracle Gathering people (some of whom were also in the ritual
that we were doing) and then hurried back for our ritual. Ours, an
Invocation of Chronos and of the Four Powers of the Sphinx (I was one of
the four powers, as was R), went fairly well though attendence was light
from what I could tell. I didn't have a vantage point to see the
audience without staring... After the ritual, we went to the Black Sun
stage, where most of the Goth/Industrial stuff was to be in order to try
to see the performer that R had really come to listen to...and we never
saw him. I'm not sure, at this moment, if he ever performed but we did
see him hanging out earlier in the day. Regardless of this, there was a
DJ spinning music, people dancing and we got to hang out with some of
our friends and talk. R and I also got the opportunity to sample some
absinthe as well. I spoke to the fellow for a few minutes and mentioned
my interest in spagyrics (plant alchemy) and in learning distillation
and he went a little into the process of how he produced the absinthe.
Between that and asking one of our friends who knew him, it became
pretty clear that this guy really knew his stuff and had brewed his
drink in all the right ways. I must say that it definitely had an odd
taste but I think I could grow to like it. A possible project for when I
get distillation equipment set up... R and I crashed at something like
three in the morning, slept into the early morning, got breakfast and
wound up leaving the site by 1:30 or 2:00 in the afternoon. It was a
fairly relaxing camping trip and it was good to see people and do
things. I'm not sure how well the event really went overall though. The
raver contingent was out in full force but there were probably a fifth
as many goth types, which was disappointing and I only got to see one
band perform and I don't even know who it was!
