---
author: admin
date: '2002-06-24 13:58:00'
layout: post
slug: death
status: publish
title: Death
wordpress_id: '859'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Notable People
---

My friend [Ben Rowe](http://w3.one.net/~browe/) is dead. He died this
last Thursday (6/20) from complications due to the chemo he was getting
to treat his lung cancer. I received an e-mail from a family member
telling me while I was out this weekend. Ben and I hadn't spoken a lot
during the last two years. He'd been sick for much of it and hadn't been
on the net much. He and I only met in the flesh once, about four or five
years ago, when he came to town to visit another mutual friend but he
and I had known each other from the old pagan/occult BBS networks back
around 1990 or so. I'd known him for most of my adult life. Ben was a
magician and a dedicated one. His work focussed on Enochian magic quite
heavily and I felt that Ben had had some profound insights over time.
When I first started doing webwork on what eventually became
[Hermetic.com](http://www.hermetic.com/), putting up some of his work
was one of my first priorities. This was back when it was much rarer to
have a website and Ben didn't have the skills or the inclination to
create his own. [This site](http://www.hermetic.com/browe) was the
result and it's stayed largely the same for the last few years.
Eventually, Ben put up his own site at
[http://w3.one.net/\~browe/](http://w3.one.net/~browe/) and started some
really cool projects like converting Agrippa and the Abramelin work to
PDF format. Ben was always a presentation purist and hated the way HTML
didn't let you lay things out how you wanted... ;-) I'm going to copy
his website and put it up on Hermetic.com in the next day so Ben's work
doesn't disappear. His family member didn't know how long the existing
site on one.net would stay up though he thought Ben paid the bill on an
annual basis. He told me that anyone interested in the materials there
should copy them soon or risk them disappearing at some point. I'll miss
Ben. Maybe I'll see him again. We'll see. **Update, 10:53 AM** Ben's
site is up on Hermetic.com as
[http://www.hermetic.com/browe\_mem/index.htm](http://www.hermetic.com/browe_mem/index.htm)
now.
