---
author: admin
date: '2002-05-21 02:55:00'
layout: post
slug: life-and-events
status: publish
title: Life and Events
wordpress_id: '826'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I've written a lot less as of late. I've felt that I've had less time to
write overall and, in a sense, both less and more to write about. There
is only so much that one can write about how good one's life is going
right now. I'm sure that it gets tiresome to read and I don't have a lot
to add there. R and I are looking at moving into a house towards the
latter part of the summer. That should be interesting, to say the least.
In a 11 days, [Origins II](http://www.anunnaki.org/origins) will be
occuring. This is the big fundraiser and annual event for [the Anunnaki
Project](http://www.anunnaki.org) (who I webmaster for...). This should
be a lot of fun and very interesting to local people. I encourage those
interested to purchase tickets ahead of time. I should be staffing a
table or some other step 'n fetchit kind of work there. The
disorganizers ( being one) haven't really said yet. I'm doing some
interesting stuff this summer. It looks like one event or trip a month.
In June, over the weekend of the Solstice, I had been planning on going
to **Black Star Gathering**. I'm friends with one of the organizers and
I've volunteered to help out if needed. It looks like I may be involved
in one of the ritual performances there. In early to mid-July, I'll be
going to northern California for a couple of weeks with R for a planned
outing. In late July, I'll be going to
[Illuminares](http://www.thedrive.net/publicdreams/illuminares.htm) to
perform with the [Cabiri](http://www.cabiri.org). This is an annual
event up in Vancouver, British Columbia and is supposed to be a lot of
fun. There is a camping trip with the [local
OTO](http://www.seattle-oto.org) in August over to the Olympic
Penninsula at a spot that R and I found last year during our camping
trip out there. Somehow, I don't think that I'll be going to Burning Man
this year. There is too much going on locally and the product that I
work on at Microsoft will be shipping, effectively, about the same time
as Burning Man will be happening so I'll probably be a bit wrapped up
there. *Here is some more information on the Black Sun Gathering for
those that are interested...* **The Black Sun Gathering** **What is
it?:** The Black Sun gathering is a Dark Arts Festival. The intent is to
bring together the weird, dark, dramatic and unusual elements of life
and culture to a location of natural habitat. To bring forth a sense of
communion with the elements and a general state of freedom to express
our art and share it with those who will appreciate it. **History:** The
Black Sun Gathering is put on by Dark Star productions and has gone
under various titles for each of the Solstice and Equinox occurrences.
In the past they have taken place in the northern parts of Washington.
Our Prior gatherings were weekend campouts. Each night there was
performance, music and ritual. Some of the prior acts includedâ€¦
\*Witch-hunt (with Michael from Blood Axis, Annabel of Amber Asylum,
B'eirth of In Gowan Ring, and Marcus from the former group Crash
Worship.) \*Faith and Disease \*Bloodbox (Michael Hensley of Yen Pox)
\*Anima Nocturna (ritual performance) \*Lady Heather Djara
(Bellydancing) \*Fear of Dolls \*pFrenz-C \*DJ Fountainhead
\*\*\*Homebrew wines and ales. and many other performers of various
nature. **Future:** The gathering is taking place in Washington. As
usual it will be a 3 day weekend campout. The theme and musical
influence is of eclectic influence stemming from Gothic, Industrial,
Tribal, Trance and Experimental sources. The production is and always
has been a non profit gig. We are interested in incorporating a wide
array of performance with the gathering. Contact by email if you would
like to be a participant. The event will begin on the 21st of June,
Friday (Summer Solstice) and end on the 23rd of June, Sunday. We hope to
see you there.
