---
author: admin
date: '2002-11-07 03:19:00'
layout: post
slug: wi-fi
status: publish
title: Wi-Fi
wordpress_id: '1011'
categories:
- Technology
---

Well, I've finally gone Wi-Fi in the house. R has always disliked the
ethernet cable across the middle of the hallway and, even with the
carpet, people trip on it. Beyond that, we have rooms upstairs and a
basement room directly beneath the living room that can't easily reach
the hub... So I went out and got 802.11b hardware. I was a company man
and bought the stuff that Microsoft puts out. It was competitive and I
actually got a good discount at the company store. Also, I knew that our
setup and configuration would work well under WinXP, which we run here,
given that my masters make all of it... I picked up two USB adapters
(one for R's machine and one for mine) and a wireless hub. I configured
the hub off of my main machine, set a WEP key and tested everything to
make sure stuff was working. I then disconnected my old hub, the miles
of ethernet, and went and put the Cisco DSL "modem" and the wireless hub
on top of my bookcase in the living room. In the next room, the computer
room, signal is great (not surprising since I'm 15 feet away) and from
that spot, my room directly above the living room, the basement room and
other attached rooms should all get decent coverage, even through the
walls. We're in an old tudor style house and the walls are drywall and
paint without huge amounts of metal. Now I can bring my laptop home from
work (I have wireless in it) or the iBook that I have for our team to
borrow and use them in any room without any cables. That should make
watching TV and reading e-mail at the same time easier. ;-)
