---
author: admin
date: '2002-05-15 23:13:00'
layout: post
slug: money-reading-materials
status: publish
title: Money & Reading Materials
wordpress_id: '820'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

Well, I got paid today, which is good because I had $11 in my account
when it happened. This has gotten to be appalling to me. I make a
buttload of money (without getting into specifics) as a Test Lead at
Microsoft. I have three full-time employees, two contractors and an
intern working for me this summer (plus another contractor who is done
after this week). So, I have something approaching a professional job
for real money and ***I'm always running out of money,*** I've been
treading water there for at least the last six months and it really
irritates me. I need to reign in my expenses a bit. I've started using
MS Money, which I use to track my account and purchases, to figure out
what I need to cut. Getting rid of my car (or paying it off somehow)
would make a difference. Unfortunately, I owe about $9K on it. Of
course, I just handed almost $400 to my ex-wife today to pay for child
care for our daughter and some miscellaneous expenses. At the first of
the month, I'll be paying her rent. Sometimes that annoys me but I do it
for Madeline, my daughter. My ex-wife, Chris, is going to school to
become a primary schoolteacher and I want my daughter to have a role
model of a successful woman with a real career that she's chosen (as
opposed to having a mom doing this or that from year to year, which
would be the case otherwise). This has been going on since my separation
and divorce in 1997. Some of the expenses will diminish in a year and a
half or so... Since R and I are looking at moving into a house this
summer (together! yay!), I need to start saving up some cash. I have a
tax return coming so that is a start. Also, I *should* get a bonus in
August based on performance but that could be late in the game for our
needs and you can't rely on it. Anyway, in other news, I picked up some
reading in the last day in the non-fiction department. From the company
library, of all places, I got [How to Think Like Leonardo da
Vinci](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0440508274/) on kind of a
random whim without looking it up first. Now that I've got it in my
hands and have gone and looked at reviews of it, I'm quite impressed. It
looks like a really useful book. I bought a copy of [Heart Drops of
Dharmakaya : *Dzogchen Practice of the Bon
Tradition*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1559391723/) at the
University Bookstore when I happened to see it on the shelf. I've been
reading a bit on Dzogchen off and on and have been investigating things
relating to Bon as well. This book looks to be quite a find. I have a
used copy of [Healing With Form, Energy, and Light : *The Five Elements
in Tibetan Shamanism, Tantra, and
Dzogchen*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1559391766/) on its
way to me as well, which only just came out. I have some interesting
reading in both Eastern and Western thought to do in the near future...
I'm also still finishing Donald Michael Kraig's book on sex magic as
part of a current series of workings and exploration that I'm doing as
well. It's pretty normal for me to be reading three or so things at a
time (if you include novels)...
