---
author: admin
date: '2002-06-03 13:45:00'
layout: post
slug: further-black-sun-gathering-information
status: publish
title: Further Black Sun Gathering Information
wordpress_id: '842'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

This is the updated information that I received last night in e-mail for
the Black Sun Gathering. **The Black Sun Gathering** **What is it?:**
The Black Sun gathering is a Dark Arts Festival. The intent is to bring
together the weird, beautiful, dramatic and unusual elements of life and
culture to a location of natural habitat. To bring forth a sense of
communion with the elements and a general state of freedom to express
our art and share it with those who will appreciate it. **When is it?**
Summer Solstice, beginning June 21st (friday) and ending the morning of
June 24th (monday) of 2002. **History:** The Black Sun Gathering is put
on by Dark Star productions and has gone under various titles for each
of the Solstice and Equinox occurrences. In the past they have taken
place in the northern parts of Washington, on a smaller scale. Recently
it has come to our attention that many are interested in becoming a part
of our events... and so we are growing and becoming more accessible to
the populace. Our Prior gatherings were weekend campouts. Each night
there was performance, music and ritual performance. **Who is it?** Some
of the acts for this Summer Solstice festival include. D.J.'s \*michiko
(electro, IDM) \*Mistress\_Catherinna ( synthgoth/darkwave) \*Drew (Old
school gothick/Industrial) \*Osiris of the Oracle gatherings (elelctro,
trance, tribal) \*Fountainhead (Industrial breakbeat) Bands and
Performers \* C.O.T.A. (L.A.)
[http://www.sonicksorcery.com](http://www.sonicksorcery.com) \*Abney
Park (Wa.)
[http://www.abneypark.com/2002/Acheivements.htm](http://www.abneypark.com/2002/Acheivements.htm)
\* AA23 (L.A.)
[http://www.cinenet.net/\~jedi/flyergallery.html](http://www.cinenet.net/~jedi/flyergallery.html)
\* Brian C (Wa.)
[http://www.tragickrecords.com/pfrenz-c/](http://www.tragickrecords.com/pfrenz-c/)
\* Sumerland (Oregon)
[http://www.sumerland.com/](http://www.sumerland.com/) \* Nequaquam
Vacuum (Oregon)
[http://www.wweek.com/flatfiles/n\_z.html](http://www.wweek.com/flatfiles/n_z.html)
(also)
[http://www.radonstudio.com/galleries/vacuumjasminegalleryb/FrameSet.htm](http://www.radonstudio.com/galleries/vacuumjasminegalleryb/FrameSet.htm)
\* Perception As Narcotic (Oregon) ( Butoh performers) \* Dark Star
Theatre (Wa.) (ritual performance theatre) \*The Red King (Oregon)
(Theatrical music performance) \*Soriah (Oregon) (enrique from
Sumerland, a ritual vocal performance) \* Aesthetic Meat Foundation and
Vial (performance art from Ca., and the gothick zine from San Francisco)
[http://www.vialmagazine.com](http://www.vialmagazine.com) \* Johnny
Forlorne (Wa.) (A new side project of Eric Cooley, Dara and others
(Faith and Disease)... \* Melting Snow (Wa.) (Fire performance and
dance), Snoh of Cirque de Flambe \*Thelema presents (Wa.) ( The Gnostic
Mass and more...) \* Sardonic Grin (Oregon) (Dissident, dark, at times
rhythmic electronic music) [www.2gyrlz.org](http://www.2gyrlz.org)
\*Entropic Advance (Wa.) (Live electronic manipulations of sound,
ethereal vocals and ambient textures) \*Aletheia (Wa.) (Acoustic guitar
and ambient soundscapes) and more acts still coming through.... **Tell
me more... :** The gathering is taking place in central Washington. As
usual it will be a 3 day weekend campout. The theme and musical
influence is of eclectic influence stemming from Gothic, Industrial,
Tribal, Trance and Experimental sources.. with performances of dance,
fire, music, Theatre, ritual and more. The production is and always has
been a non profit gig. The cost of entry merely serves to cover initial
costs of land usage, preparation and cleanup (Call 1-866-ORACLE-3 for
tickets and directions). The event will begin on the 21st of June,
Friday (Summer Solstice) and ends Monday morning the 24th of June. We
hope to see you there. **Contact:** You may contact Dark Star
Productions at theeblacksun@aol.com for further information or call
1-866-ORACLE-3. **Volunteer:** Don't have the money but want to come? We
will be accepting volunteers at the festival for free entrance, email
pxi@oraclegatherings.com or call 1-866-ORACLE-3 for futher information.
Make sure to state your interest in volunteering for the Black Sun
gathering.
