---
author: admin
date: '2002-12-15 07:43:00'
layout: post
slug: ongs-hat
status: publish
title: Ong's Hat
wordpress_id: '1051'
categories:
- Esoteric
- Society
- Spirituality
---

I find this page amusing:
[http://incunabula.org/reviews.html](http://incunabula.org/reviews.html).
I was one of the first people to put the Ong's Hat stuff on the web a
number of years ago (four or five...) and text files of it circulated on
the BBS networks that we were running back into the early 90's. In the
course of my interactions with the Moors and the Hakim Bey crowd over
the last ten years (ask me sometime about how TAZ got onto the Internet
for the first time...) with my pages and my personal involvement, the
Ong's Hat/Incunabula stuff came up. The style of some segments seemed
pretty familiar from the circle of people around Hakim Bey and I asked
around. It turns out that a friendly acquaintance of mine here in
Seattle, an old friend of Hakim Bey's, actually wrote this stuff and
"published" it as a lark. He admitted freely to it and seemed surprised
that the stuff was still circulating. Given the tone of much of the
material and when it started showing up, I tend to believe him. He's an
artist and the kind of guy to pull this off. He claimed responsibility
long before the people below showed up on the scene but he never did so
publicly. He did only really admit to it when I pointed out that some
people thought that Hakim Bey had written it. ;-) It seems that other
people who have no idea of where it comes from or the nature of its
connections have taken it and run with it over the last few years. There
is a big conspiracy thing built around it if you do a google search on
"Ong's Hat." I'm not sure whether to be apalled or annoyed or just
simply amused by the way the world works. I suppose the original author
doesn't actually care so it doesn't matter but part of me feels that it
is unfair, as talented as some of these newer people seem to be, for
people to take someone else's ideas and run with them. Ah well. The
fellow that is now claiming to have created this has a
[book](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/096781622X/)
available and a graphic novel version of the original story has been
printed. The guy who wrote the book seems to admit that he doesn't know
where it came from [here](http://incunabula.org/original/index.html).
It's interesting to note that *Xexoxial Endarchy* mentioned here was one
of the first places outside of New York that Hakim Bey lectured at and
stayed at and that the zine they put out was distributed in the Seattle
area by people with Moorish ties. I still have some copies of it. They
had a cool site with an old school building and were teaching people
permaculture. Ong's Hat did provide some of the impetus into my
investigations of sex magic and what tantra really is... that's good in
a way though I haven't gone far with parts of that. The oldest
electronic form of this matter that's still up (and the one that wound
up being better designed than mine) which mirrors the actual published
papers is up at
[http://www.deoxy.org/irc/index.htm](http://www.deoxy.org/irc/index.htm).
**Postscript:** I just found [this
page](http://www.darkplanetonline.com/whatreally.html) and its
[associated site](http://www.darkplanetonline.com/eggroom.html) as well
which seems to be a pretty good one that doesn't try to pretend this is
real. It was a Moorish Project Mindfuck thing really.
