---
author: admin
date: '2002-06-17 03:03:00'
layout: post
slug: scotch-and-weekends
status: publish
title: Scotch and Weekends
wordpress_id: '851'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

These days, I seem to have the most time to post at the end of a
weekend. Of course, considering that I left work at 10:20 PM Thursday
night, my weeks haven't exactly been short... The 10:20 night was
actually interesting. They've taken to feeding us dinner at 7:00
recently. Since I'm often coming out of my last meeting of the day after
six, I find myself staying for the free food. Besides, I can surf the
web and read e-mail at work as easily at home. I actually found myself
in a work situation that had to be resolved but at the end of it, my
boss' boss, Dean, says to me, my boss and another lead, "Hey, let's go
to my office and drink some of my good scotch." So, there I am, finding
myself 30 years old with a corporate job at 8:30 at night hanging out at
work with my boss, his boss and a peer drinking quality scotch... I feel
like I should be my fucking granpa or something. Where did my life wind
up on this path? I'm not even complaining this time. It just strikes me
as odd sometimes where my life has gone. On a plus note, I spent most of
my weekend with R. I crashed there Friday night and then spent Saturday
with her going to lecture on lions and goddesses followed by attending
OTO initiations at the local oasis in the evening. I also wound up
picking up some new music (the new Icon of Coil album) and another, the
last, tape of bootleg Invader Zim since I lack cable. R had been feeling
a craving for watching a bad vampire movie so we rented John Carpenter's
"Vampires." Man, what a stinker that was! Woo! At whim, since R had
never seen it, I grabbed the DVD of "Scanners" in the store and we
watched that today as well. I'd seen the movie in a drive in when I was
a kid but hadn't seen it since. It was pretty dated in some ways but I
liked it better than Campires... The exploding head thing is always cool
and it didn't pretend to be anything other than a B movie. I, of course,
made the requisite call to my Y chromosone donor today and attended the
meeting of my Aurum Solis-based lodge. We also did another ritual
practice for the Black Sun Gathering with that crew. I'm not feeling
100% on the ritual, especially since I'm wearing friggin' yellow but
we'll see. All in all, a busy weekend as all have been since R and I got
back together. Now we just need to find a house since my Dad backed out
of renting us his. It looks like it will be a few months before we move
now, probably September.
