---
author: admin
date: '2002-06-04 03:34:00'
layout: post
slug: the-sphinx-in-liber-aleph
status: publish
title: The Sphinx in Liber Aleph
wordpress_id: '843'
categories:
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

I'm contemplating the Sphinx, it's riddle and meaning today. From [Liber
Aleph](http://www.hermetic.com/crowley/aleph/index.html), a few chapters
where the Sphinx is mentioned... **Et** **DE SPHINGE AEGYPTIORUM** It is
now expedient that I instruct thee concerning the Four Powers of the
Sphinx, and firstly, that this most arcane of the Mysteries of Antiquity
was never at any Period the Tool of the Slavegods, but a Witness of
Horus through the dark Æon of Osiris to His Light and Truth, His Force
and Fire. Thou canst by no means interpret the Sphinx in Terms of the
Formula of the Slain God. This did I comprehend even when as Eliphas
Levi Zahed I walked up and down the Earth, seeking a Reconciliation of
these Antagonisms, which was a Task impossible, for in that Plane they
have Antipathy. (Even so may no Man form a Square Magical of Four
Units.) But the Light of the New Æon revealeth this Sphinx as the true
Symbol of this our Holy Art of Magick under the Law of Thelema. In Her
is the equal Development and Disposition of the Forces of Nature, each
in its Balanced Strength; also Her True Name has the Digamma for Phi,
and endeth in Upsilon, not in Xi, so that Her Orthography is SFINUwhose
Numeration is Six Hundred and Three Score and Six. For the Root thereof
is ***S F***,which signifieth the Incarnation of the Spirit; and of Kin
are not only the Sun, Our Father, but Sumer, where Man knew himself Man,
and Soma, the Divine Potion that giveth Men Enlightenment, and Scin,
Light Astral, and Scire also, by a far Travelling. But especially is
this Root hidden in Sus, that is of the Sow, Swine, because the Most
Holy must needs take its Delight under the Omphalos of the Unclean. But
this was hidden by Wisdom in Order that the Arcanum should not be
profaned during the Æon of the Slain God. But now it has been given unto
me to understand the Heart of Her Mystery, wherefore, o my Son, by Right
of the Great Love that I bear unto thee, I will inform thee thereof.
**Eu** **DE NATURA SFINU** Firstly, this Sphinx is a Symbol of the
Coition of Our Lady **B A B A L O N** with me **T H E B E A S T** in its
Wholeness. For as I am of the Lion and the Dragon, so is She of the Man
and the Bull, in our Natures, but the Converse thereof in our Offices,
as thou mayst understand by the Study of the Book of *The Vision and the
Voice*. It is thus a Glyph of the Satisfaction and Perfection of the
Will and of the Work, the completion of the True Man as the Reconcilor
of the Highest with the Lowest, so for our Convenience conventionally to
distinguish them. This then is the Adept, who doth Will with solid
Energy as the Bull, doth dare with fierce Courage as the Lion, doth know
with swift Intelligence as the Man, and doth keep Silence with soaring
Subtlety as the Eagle or Dragon. Moreover, this Sphinx is an Eidolon of
the Law, for the Bull is Life, the Lion is Light, the Man is Liberty,
the Serpent Love. Now then this Sphinx, being perfect in true Balance,
yet taketh the Aspect of the Feminine Principle that so She may be
partner of the Pyramid, that is the Phallus, pure Image of Our Father
the Sun, the Unity Creative. The Signification of this Mystery is that
the Adept must be Whole, Himself, containing all Things in true
Proportion, before he maketh himself Bride of the One Universal
Transcendental, in its most Secret Virtue. And now therefore, o my Son,
comprehending this Mystery by thine Intelligence, I will write further
unto thee of these Four Beasts of Power. ***F*a** **DE DRACONE, QUAE EST
AQUILA** **SERPENS SCORPIO** Threefold is the Nature of Live, Eagle,
Serpent, and Scorpion. And of these the Scorpion is he that, having no
Lion of Light and of Courage within him, seemeth to himself encircled by
Fire, and, driving his Sting into himself, he dieth. Such are the Black
Brothers, that cry: I am I, they that deny Love, restricting it to their
own Nature. But the Serpent is the secret Nature of Man, that is Life
and Death, and maketh his Way through the Generations in Silence. And
the Eagle is that Might of Live which is the Key of Magick, uplifting
the Body and its Appurtenance unto high Ecstasy upon his Wings. It is by
Virtue thereof that the Sphinx beholdeth the Sun unwinking, and
confronteth the Pyramid without Shame. Our Dragon, therefore, combining
the Natures of the Eagle and the Serpent, is our Love, the Organon of
our Will, by whose Virtue we perform the Work and Miracle of the One
Substance, as saith thine Ancestor Hermes Trismegistus, in his Tablet of
Smaragda. And this Dragon, is called thy Silence, because in the Hour of
his Operation that within thee which saith "I" is abolished in its
Conjunction with the Beloved. For this Cause also is its Letter Nun,
which in our Rota is the Trump Death; and Nun hath the value of Fifty,
the Number of the Gates of Understanding. ***F*b** **DE QUATTUOR
VIRTUTIS SFINU** See now our Sphinx, with what Subtility and Art is She
made Whole! Here is thy Light, the Lion, the Necessity of thy Nature,
fortified by thy Life, the Bull, the Power of Works, and guided by thy
Liberty, the Man, the Wit to adapt Action to Environment. These are
three Virtues in One, necessary to all proper Motion, as I may say in a
Figure, the Lust of the Archer, the propulsive Force of his Arm, and the
equilibrating and directing Control of his Eye. Of these three if one
fail, the Mark is not hit. But hold! Is not a Fourth Element essential
in the Work? Yea, soothly, all were vain without the Engine, Arrow and
Bow. This Engine is thy Body, possessed by thee and used by thee for thy
Work, yet not Part of thee, even as are his Weapons to this Archer in my
Similitude. Thus is thy Dragon to be cherished of thy Lion, but if thou
lack Energy and Endurance of thy Bull, thy Tools lie idle, and if
Cunning and Intelligence, with Experience also of thy Man, thy Shaft
flight crooked. So then, o my son, do thou perfect thyself in these Four
Powers, and that with Equity. ***F*g** **DE LIBRA, IN QUA GUATTUOR
VIRTUTES AEQUIPOLLENT** By Gñana Yoga cometh thy Man to Knowledge; by
Karma Yoga thy Bull to Will; by Raja Yoga is thy Lion brought to his
Light; and to make perfect thy Dragon, thou hast Bhakti Yoga for the
Eagle therein, and Hatha Yoga for the Serpent. Yet mark thou well how
all these interfuse, so that thou mayst accomplish no one of the Works
separately. As to make Gold thou must have Gold (it is the Word of the
Alchemists), so to become the Sphinx thou must first be a Sphinx. For
naught may grow save to the Norm of its own Nature, and in the Law of
its own Law, or it is but Artifice, and endureth not. So therefore is it
Folly, and a Rape wrought upon Truth to aim at aught but the Fulfilment
of thine own True Nature. Order then thy Workings in Accord with thy
Knowledge of that Norm as best thou mayst, not heeding the Importunity
of them that prate of the Ideal. For this Rule, this Uniformity, is
proper only to a Prison, and a Man Liveth by Elasticity, nor endureth
Rigor save in Death. But whoso groweth bodily by a Law foreign to his
own Nature, he hath a Cancer, and his whole Œconomy shall be destroyed
by that small Disobedience. ***F*d** **DE PYRAMIDE** Now then at last
art thou made ready to confront the Pyramid, if thou art established as
a Sphinx. For It also hath the foursquare Base of Law, and the Four
Triangles of Light, Life, Love and Liberty for its Sides, that meet in a
Point of Perfection that is Hadit, poised to the Kiss of Nuit. But in
this Pyramid there is no Difference of Form between the Sides, as it is
in thy Shinx, for these are wholly One, save in Direction. Thou art then
an Harmony of the Four by Right of thy Attainment of Adeptship, the
Crown of thy Manhood, but not an Identity, as in Godhead. Therefore may
it be said from one Point of Sight that thine Achievement is but a
Preparation, an Adornment of the Bride for the Temple of Hymen, and his
Rite. Verily, o my Son, I deem in my Wisdom that this whole Work of thy
Development to Sphinxhood cometh before the Work of Theurgy, for the
Lord descendeth not upon a Temple ill-conceived, and builded wry, nor
abideth in a Shrine unworthy. Accomplish then this Task in Patience,
with Assiduity, not hasting furiously after Godliness. For this is most
sure, that to the Beauty of a Maiden answereth the Lust of her Lord,
spontaneous and without Effort or Appeal of her Contriving. ***F*t**
**DE HERBO SANCTISSIMO ARABICO** Recall, o my Son, the Fable of the
Hebrews, which they brought from the City Babylon, how Nebuchadnezzar
the Great King, being afflicted in his Spirit, did depart from among Men
for Seven Years' Space, eating Grass as doth an Ox. Now this Ox is the
Letter Aleph, and is that Atu of Thoth whose Number is Zero, and whose
name is Maat, Truth, or Maut, the Vulture, the All-Mother, being an
Image of Our Lady Nuit, but also it is called the Fool, who is Parsifal,
"der reine Thor", and so referreth to him that walketh in the Way of the
Tao. Also, he is Harpocrates, the Child Horus, walking, (as saith David,
the Badavi that became King in his Psalms) upon the Lion and the Dragon;
that is, he is in Unity with his own secret Nature, as I have shewn thee
in my Word concerning the Sphinx. O my Son, yester Eve came the Spirit
upon me that I also should eat the Grass of the Arabs, and by Virtue of
the Bewitchment thereof behold that which might be appointed for the
Enlightenment of mine Eyes. Now then of this may I not speak, seeing
that it involveth the Mystery of the Transcending of Time, so that in
One Hour of our terrestrial Measure did I gather the Harvest of an Æon,
and in Ten Lives I could not declare it.
