--- 
wordpress_id: 947
layout: post
title: 83024
date: 2002-09-11 19:22:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=947
---
From <a href="http://www.dangermouse.net/wolfe/lego.html">http://www.dangermouse.net/wolfe/lego.html</a>. This made me laugh a lot... <h2>
          Non-Euclidean Lego
        </h2>
        
        <em>Ph-nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn.</em> Bored with 3-dimensional orthogonal Lego constructions? No more! With <strong>Arlington Wolfe Non-Euclidean Lego</strong> you can build the Cthulhoid contrivances of your most fevered imagination! No longer must your Lego constructions be confined to the standard linear spatial dimensions. You can now build houses with all the angles greater than 90 degrees, to avoid attracting the Hounds of Tindalos. Put together your very own cyclopean blasphemies with sanity-sapping geometries. Span immense interstellar gulfs with nothing more than a handful of 2x4 bricks. Choose from a wide range of boxed sets, including: <ul>
          <li>
            <strong>Temple at R'lyeh</strong> Build a replica of the green slimy-vaulted temple where <a href="http://www.cis.rit.edu/~jerry/Image/lego/cthulu.html">mighty Cthulhu</a> slumbers in the nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh! Custom<strong>Arlington Wolfe Non-Euclidean Lego</strong> pieces recreate the tenebrous qualities of the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down from the stars. The abnormal geometries of Gustaf Johansen's dizzying visions of the hideous cosmic majesty, the stupefyingly colossal statues, the impious and horrible <em>angles</em> in the sea-soaked perversions of the fantasmally variable carven structures he saw under that insanely gibbous moon borne on a gropingly membranous sky are all here for you to enjoy. <em>Iä! Iä! Cthulhu fhtagn!</em>
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>The Witch House</strong> The hideous gambrel-roofed house where Walter Gilman suffered feverish and febrile dreams of unspeakable evil in a room with an oddly slanting floor and sloped walls whose angles do not fit into normal space or dimensionality. Complete with a custom piece representing the anomolous and monstrously degraded skeleton of Brown Jenkin.
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>Mountains of Madness</strong> Put together the fragments of cyclopean masonry which reconstruct the mind-numbingly palaeogean and monstrously decadent edifices of the ancient city of the Elder Things which lurks near the unfathomed and abhorrent mountains of madness in central Antarctica. Create the astonishing arabesque traceries of obscurely mathematical and antique psychology with which these alien creatures and their demoniac Shoggoths decorated their immeasurably detestable nightmare city.
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>The Whateley House</strong> Recreate this peaked-roofed house with its rear buried in the hillside near Dunwich Village. The ground floor rooms look normal enough, but hidden in the upper floors are the grotesque demon-spawn of Yog-Sothoth!
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>The House of Erich Zann</strong> The eerie gable-windowed house on the unlocatably shadowed and incredibly steep Rue d'Auseil where Erich Zann played his frenzied and feverish harmonies, opening vast gulfs to the blackness of space illimitable, where chaos and pandemonium entered the demon madness of the strange peaked garret to the sound of the unutterable music.
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>Innsmouth</strong> With this monstrous set you can build several entire streets of the accursed seaside town of Innsmouth, including the ominous hall of the Esoteric Order of Dagon. Recreate the path of the unnamed narrator in his horror flight from the Gilman House through the streets of Innsmouth, pursued by the hideously shambling half-human natives. As a bonus, the pieces in this set can also be used to construct the lair of the Deep Ones: Cyclopean and many-columned Y'ha-nthlei!
          </li>
        </ul>
        
        <em>Ph-nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn.</em> Warning: <strong>Arlington Wolfe Non-Euclidean Lego</strong> may cause insanity in the weak-minded.