---
author: admin
date: '2002-06-03 02:39:00'
layout: post
slug: shows-rites-and-activities
status: publish
title: Shows, Rites, and Activities
wordpress_id: '841'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I've had a busy weekend and actually haven't had much of a chance to get
on the computer for more than a brief e-mail or two. [Origins
II](http://www.anunnaki.org/origins/) went well. I'm not sure how many
people showed up in total but the FUNC was pretty much filled by the end
of the evening. I heard most of the alcohol was sold as well. I got
drafted for impromptu fire safety duty which generally means crouching
low and in front ready to put flaming friends out. ;-) Here are a couple
of picture of the Cabiri mid-air with flaming torches from the show.
We'll have details of the performance up on the [Anunnaki Productions
page](http://www.anunnaki.org/productions) soon. These are Charly and J
wrapped around each other, hanging in mid-air and carrying flaming
torches. ![image](http://www.zhangzhung.net/lj/peacock1-web.jpg)
![image](http://www.zhangzhung.net/lj/peacock2-web.jpg) Cool stuff. Some
day I'll learn to do aerial work (whenever it gets offered in class).
Avoiding the clinging and zombie-like grasp of Work, on Saturday R and I
had a nice breakfast and spent some quality time together. We also got
to watch the movie
[Versus](http://www.kfccinema.com/reviews/action/versus/versus.html), a
kind of Japanese Yakuza meets Night of the Living Dead movie. I found it
highly entertaining, though mindless, and plan on purchasing it. During
the course of the day, I went to the release party for my friend
William's edition of the *Picatrix*, an important Arabic magical text
that was very influential in Europe but which has never been translated
into English until now. A summary of the Picatrix in general is
[available](http://www.esotericarchives.com/picatrix.htm) and you can
[contact William](http://www.blarg.net/~kiesel) if you are interested in
purchasing it. It isn't cheap though. This was a nice event to attend
and a number of people that I haven't seen in quite a while were there.
We've been waiting years for this project to be done and to have the
book in our hands so I was quite pleased. After this, I ran off to an
OTO dinner celebration in honor of a local Brother who has been given a
new role in the Order as a whole. There were 40+ people at this event,
which was provided gratis by the local body, Horizon, as a celebration.
I had an excellent time and got a chance to talk with number of local
people that I don't usually get to sit down with... Today I had a fairly
low-key day with R again. Since we normally only really get to see each
other on the weekend for any period of time, it was nice to have a bit
of quality time with her. We got breakfast and hit the Fremont Sunday
Market. The only thing we purchased was a reproduction of an Athenian
coin bearing the image of the goddess Athena on one side and the Owl,
Olive Tree and Waning Moon (her symbols) on the other. This will make a
fine addition to my altar. She and I eventually went to a ritual
practice for the Black Sun Gathering (detailed a bit in [this
post](http://www.livejournal.com/talkread.bml?journal=cadmus&itemid=54506)
of mine) and found out what roles we get to play in the main ritual
there. I'm looking forward to the event and the ritual but aspects of it
are kind of daunting for me. I'm sure I'll manage to do well though but
I have some prepatory magical work that I have to do to lead up to it.
All of this was followed by a lodge meeting for *Ouroboros Lodge*, the
local magical group with whom I do my personal magical work. All in all,
a fairly busy weekend and I'm only now getting home and having a chance
to sit down.
