---
author: admin
date: '2002-10-02 04:12:00'
layout: post
slug: life-and-disease
status: publish
title: Life and Disease
wordpress_id: '966'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Technology
---

Well, I'm a fucking moron sometimes, truth must be told. "Gee, Al," I
say to myself, "Let's play with the fucking website via the unix shell.
Hell, let's try moving some directories around with unix commands that
you can't quite remember the syntax of...what's the worst you can do to
the website you haven't backed up in six months?" *fast forward two
hours* Hmm...half of hermetic.com now seems to reside in an obscure
sub-directory instead of at root. Well, at least I didn't delete content
or lose data. I think I'm burning a CD of the website tomorrow too once
I finish fixing the stupid thing...My own dumbass is to blame here. On a
positive note, the reason I was fucking with things is that I'm probably
going to put up a news and commentary site. A chunk of the occult
community used to use [beastbay.com](http://www.beastbay.com) but that
had some difficulties earlier this year and is now permanently inactive.
I figure Hermetic.com can probably take up some of the slack if I put
together a content management system. We'll see if I'm a skilled enough
monkey to do it. My boss was home sick today and others have been out
recently. I'm normally one of those annoying bastards that doesn't get
sick but I'm feeling a little icky at the moment. I'm hoping I didn't
catch it. If I did, I may just sleep in tomorrow. On another note, my
brother called me out of the blue from Utah and asked me to go to a
local store to pick up stickers being given away there for
[suicidegirls.com](http://www.suicidegirls.com). This immediately begs
the question of how my brother knew that I would both know where this
store is and what suicidegirls.com is...Of course, I've been to the
store and I have an account at the latter but still... This is my
brother who I haven't lived with in 17 years and barely really know. It
isn't like we chat all of the time and share deep and meaningful
exchanges about naked goth chicks.
