---
author: admin
date: '2002-11-18 17:27:00'
layout: post
slug: the-tempest
status: publish
title: The Tempest
wordpress_id: '1029'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---

R and I went to see a production of Shakespeare's *The Tempest* by the
[Seattle Shakespeare Company](http://www.seattleshakes.org). We had a
good time and thoroughly enjoyed ourselves at the play. The company's
space is a small theatre in the Seattle Center House at the Seattle
Center and it probably seats 80 people at best and wasn't completely
full. The actors do their production with a fairly minimal set and were
probably all of twenty to twenty five feet away from the two of us most
of the time. I've never seen the Tempest before (only read most of it at
various points) and it was good to see it all. The group is doing a
production of Twelfth Night and the Taming of the Shrew during their
current season as well. This weekend was fairly easy going. R and I went
out to breakfast Saturday morning, something we rarely do with our
dietary restrictions these days, and then visited a travel agent to
speak about our trip to Greece. We didn't really get a sense that we
were going to get a better rate working with someone so we retreated to
home. I wound up buying tickets via Expedia after looking at various
options. We're going for less than $1,500 round trip for both of us
(total). That's not chump change but it's a lot less than the $2,300 or
more that I saw in places. We'll be there the first two weeks of April
and will leave on Easter. We watched the second half of the long version
of the *Fellowship of the Ring* and semed to get sucked into a lot of
movies on TV this weekend. I also finished [The
Holy](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/189395630X/) by
Daniel Quinn this weekend and found it to be quite good. I'm looking to
finish *Psychohistorical Crisis* this week (which I had put down because
it is a hardback and a huge book and didn't want to carry it on the
bus). I've got a couple of books from the UK from some of my favorite
authors there on the way so I can continue to be a Science Fiction snob.
Tonight I get to look forward to a few hours of Greek. I didn't really
study this weekend and class is tomorrow so I'll be doing homework,
reading and making flash cards this evening at home. I'm still
investigating schools for possible Graduate work. Classics at the
University of Washington seems to be clearly out. I e-mailed the only
prof with interests even related to my own and he just passed me off to
the chair of the department with the addition of the comment that they
normally only take people with a bachelor's in Classics. Since mine is
Cultural Anthropology and he also hinted about **more than** two years
in both Latin and Greek (which doesn't really match what was learning
there) to get in, I'm thinking Religious Studies more and more. I was
hoping to find a good program here in Seattle since R is looking at
going to Graduate school at Seattle University in the next year or so as
well and we have to mesh things between us.
