---
author: admin
date: '2002-08-09 12:43:00'
layout: post
slug: red-tara-empowerment
status: publish
title: Red Tara Empowerment
wordpress_id: '906'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
---

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/red_tara.gif)I received the
Red Tara empowerment at Chagdud Gonpa Amrita last night from Lama
Tsering. It turns out that Ghagdud Gonpa Amrita is based out of a house
that is about a ten minute drive from my own home. It's only a couple of
miles away. It's a nice house with the living room converted into a
Shrine and a library in the side entry room. I don't know much about the
place but I believe that Lama Pema and his wife (??) live there or near
there. I'm not sure how the infrastructure is set up but I'm probably
about the only first time visitor that ponders these sorts of things...
The event was to start at 7:00 but traffic was light and it wasn't as
far as I thought so I got there almost half an hour early. I hung out in
front with some fairly nice people before we went inside. Eventually,
something like 40 people showed up which, I gathered, is fairly unusual.
There was only room for all of us if we packed in tight. Before
discussing the event, I must say that this is, by far, the best
experience I've had with any Dharma group. The people were friendly and
they made conversation with me, including one nice shave headed lady who
discussed her sons and prison ministry with me. At the Sakya events that
I've attended so far, most of the people have been late thirties up into
their fifties or so in age. Predominantly boomer types. The very rare
people my age seem to be dread wearing hippies with some exceptions. Not
my normal crowd. In this group, probably a quarter of the room was my
age or younger. Piercings, tattoos, cute hair, etc. It sounds trite but
it makes a difference to see people that you'd normally expect to see
where you go. There were a number of young mothers in attendence and a
few kids of various ages (and a dog...). Lama Tsering was completely
down to earth. I don't know her nationality but I assume that she's an
American. I know that she mostly lives in Brazil these days. Unlike the
last teaching I attended, she actually stated that she knew that most of
the people in the room were young in the Dharma and even the longterm
students weren't that old in it. She then proceeded to intersperse a
teaching on why Buddhism is important and relevant, what Refuge really
is (echoing in discussing the ultimate meaning), and the Buddha nature
within with the actual practice of the Red Tara empowerment. This took
quite a while but was an amazing display since I've gotten used to
translators tersely translating basic instructions with only some
explanation. She used quite a few metaphors and discussed how students
must approach the Dharma and examples of various problems with a pot as
examples of problems that students can have (the upturned pot, the
cracked pot, the poisoned and dirty pot). I got the sense that she was a
bullshit, no-nonsense kind of lady but her sense of humor was very much
in evidence. The empowerment was similar to the ones that I've done
before except for both the strength of the teaching with it and that
when the various centers/areas were purified, there were four instead of
three. The fourth being at the navel and relating to simultaenity. This
one also had a Tsog (?) Feast as the ending bit. Sitting there, eating
meat and berries and drinking wine was a bit odd. I picked up the
practice text that their Monday night group uses and the book commentary
on the text and the Red Tara teachings. I was surprised not to see there
since Tara is her primary deity but perhaps she'll make it some other
time. I'd like to go to the practice group sometime depending on my fire
class and other scheduling conflicts. More on the Red Tara Lineage can
be found [here](http://www4.datacomm.ch/chagdud/en/lineages/tara/) and
information on Chagdud Gonpa and Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche can be found
[here](http://www4.datacomm.ch/chagdud/en/).
