---
author: admin
date: '2002-04-06 05:18:00'
layout: post
slug: rough-draft-of-the-elemental-mass-of-the-church-of-the-cadmon
status: publish
title: Rough Draft of the Elemental Mass of the Church of the Cadmon
wordpress_id: '779'
categories:
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

Lesa and I wrote this a number of years ago. It was a work in progress
for a long, long time and, to this day, I still feel that it is missing
some key elements along with quite a bit of polish. It is pretty defunct
as a project now though. The Church of the Cadmon, as such, sponsored a
Hermetic study group here in Seattle that met twice a month. and I ran
this twice a month for about seven or eight months. That study group
evolved into a working group and that working group became the current
lodge that I still work with. We have the original core of people from
the study group even with the loss of Redegg and a few others. Since
that time, our focus, as a group, has moved far away from the Church of
the Cadmon.

**The Elemental Mass of the Cadmonite Church** *Celebrants* The
celebrants of the rite differ depending on the form of the Mass. The Low
Mass (LM) may be performed by a Priest acting alone, or with the
assistance of one Acolyte. The High Mass (HM) is performed by a Priest
acting with the assistance of one member of each of the minor orders --
one Acolyte, one Exorcist, one Lector and one Deacon or someone acting
to fulfill the role of one of these orders. The ritual clothing of the
officers is based on their order within the Church. All celebrants
except the priest will wear a simple pair of loose pants and a long
(hip-length) loose shirt made of white cotton. (A pattern for these
items will be provided.) This is the standard uniform for ritual
activities for all members of any of the minor orders outside of the
mass as well. Over this clothing, a tabard is worn during ritual work.
The colors for the tabbard by celebrant are as follows:

-   Acolyte - A red with green trim
-   Lector - A blue with orange trim
-   Deacon - A green with brown trim
-   Exorcist - A violet with yellow trim

The Priest wears the following over his white clothing: A black, loose
tunic with a white sash. *Purpose of Rite* To awaken the souls of those
present to the presence of the Unity as the Cadmon, which they
inherently bear within themselves. Also, to ritually reenact the
cosmogenesis and the division and re-membering of our selves and the
universe. *Method* Ritual and symbols are used in this rite to enact the
creation of the cosmos, its division into the myriad parts of the
phenomenal world, and its reunification in the Cadmon through the
symbology of the elements. *Ritual Space* The ritual space is circular
with a central altar of square design. At the four cardinal points at
the edge of the space are square altars for the four elements, decorated
with altar cloths of the appropriate symbolic colors and possibly
images. The elements: the **Rose** for Air, the **Candle** for Fire, the
**Wine** for Water, and the **Platter** for Earth begin the rite on
their altars and remain there unless otherwise moved throughout the
ritual. The central altar is covered with a white cloth with black trim.
In the middle of the central altar is the **Lamp of the Spirit** and in
LM, at the north and south edges, the **Water Cup** and the **Fire
Censer**. (In HM these are brought in by two of the celebrants.)
Situated around the altar, at the cross-quarter points, are four large
candlesticks with white candles. It should be noted that the four
elements are placed at the actual cardinal pointsassigned to them,
irrespective of the layout of the space in which the rite is held.
***The Mass***** **1. Entrance of the Celebrants.** LM: The Priest
enters the space from the East, proceeding directly to the altar. The
Acolyte enters behind him, and circles sunwise one and a half times to
West, then advances to the altar. Reaching the altar, the Acolyte turns
to face West, and proclaims **"Hekas Hekas Esti Bebeloi!"** HM: The
Priest enters the space from the East, proceeding directly to the altar.
The other celebrants file in behind him, in the following order: Acolyte
with Fire Censer, Exorcist with Sword, Lector with Book, and Deacon with
Water Cup. As they enter the space, all four complete one and one-half
circles around the periphery of the space going with the sun, completed
in the West, and then begin to drop out at their elemental stations as
they continue circling with the sun. As each takes his station, the
officer stands to the left of their elemental altar. When all officers
are at their stations, they turn outward, and proclaim **"Hekas Hekas
Esti Bebeloi!"** in unison. The Priest lights the four candles around
the central altar. **2. Consecration of the Space.** LM: Priest: **"Let
this place be purified with water and consecrated with fire."** The
Acolyte then purifies and consecrates the space with Water Cup and Fire
Censer. He takes the Water Cup from the west side of the altar and goes
to the East of the space, making a small semi-circular loop around the
altar to do so. In the East, he moves sunwise around the periphery of
the space, stopping at each of the elemental altars. After he does this
with the Water Cup, he returns to the altar from the East, and then
circumambulates as before with the Fire Censer. During each
circumambulation, with each implement he turns outward and inscribes an
equal-armed cross in the air over each elemental altar. Additionally, as
he goes to each of the altars, with the Water Cup, he then sprinkles
water thrice with his hand to form the points of a downward pointing
triangle at each altar. With the Fire Censer, he swings it thrice to
form the points of an upward pointing triangle at each altar. When he
returns East after circumambulating the space, he says, with the Water
Cup, **"I purify with water"** and holds the cup high. When he returns
with the Fire Censer, he says, **"I consecrate with fire"** and holds
the censer high. He then returns to the central altar and deposits the
Fire Censer. After this, he loops sunwise around the altar in a
semi-circle to the west side and proceeds to stand on the right of the
water altar. Priest: **"Let the powers of the elements be invoked."**
The Acolyte then goes to the four quarters in turn, beginning with the
East, and traces an invoking pentagram of the appropriate element to
summon the spirits of the quarter. Acolyte (pointing to the center of
the pentagram): **"The Names of the Unity sound forth throughout the
*{{direction}}* quarter of the universe! By the Names and their power, I
invoke you, angels and spirits of the element of *{{element}}*."** HM:
Priest: **"Let this place be purified with water and consecrated with
fire."** The same actions are then done by the Acolyte in the Low Mass,
by the Deacon with the Water Cup, and the Acolyte with the Fire Censer.
Each one returns to his station when these actions are completed, still
carrying cup and censer. Priest: **"Let the powers of the elements be
invoked."** The Exorcist then goes to the four quarters in turn,
beginning with the East, and traces an invoking pentagram of the
appropriate element to summon the spirits of the quarter. Exorcist
(holding the sword point up): **"The Names of the Unity sound forth
throughout the *{{direction}}* quarter of the universe! By the Names and
their power, I invoke you, angels and spirits of the element of
*{{element}}*."** **3. Preliminary Invocation.** LM & HM: Priest: **"I
invoke you, divine forces of the spirit of life."** Priest: **"EXARP!
BITOM! HCOMA! NANTA!"** Priest: **"I invoke you, Angels of the celestial
spheres, whose dwelling is in the invisible. You are the guardians of
the gates of the Universe, be also the guardians of this holy place.
Keep far removed the evil and the unbalanced. Strengthen and inspire us
so that we may preserve unsullied this abode of the mysteries of the
eternal Powers. Let this sphere be pure and holy so that, entering
therein, we may become partakers of the secrets of the Light Divine."**
Priest: **"IAO!"** **4. Entrance of the Elements.** LM: The Acolyte goes
with Sun to each quarter in turn, takes up the element, bears it to the
West and then to the altar. He then reverses and returns to his station
in the West. HM: The Elements are brought in to the altar by the four
officers, all circling together to the West, advancing to the altar,
returning to the West and then going back to their stations, moving
sunwise all the while. **5. Creation of the Universe.** The lights are
dimmed to be non-existent. The Priest recites the following invocation,
with matches or lighter in hand. Priest: **"Before all things are the
silence and the darkness.** **And the gates of the Land of Night.**
**And there was but a vastness of stillness and of depth** **In the
place of the gathering darkness.** **Terrible was the silence of that
uncreated world;** **Immeasurable the depth of that abyss.** **And in
the darkness of vacancy, the Spirit moved,** **And the Lightbearers
existed for a space.** **I have said darkness of darkness;** **Are not
the countenances of darkness fallen with kings?** **Do the children of
the Night of Time last forever?** **And have they not yet passed away?**
**For Chaos cried aloud for the unity of form,** **And the face of the
Cadmon arose.** **Before the glory of that countenance the night rolled
back, and the darkness hastened away before the light of the dawning
creation."** The Priest lights the Lamp of the Spirit as the last line
is spoken. **6. Sundering of Unity.** Priest: **"And the Cadmon existed
in Unity as One, its spirit and form reflecting the light of the One
that was and is before all things known and unknown.** **In that space
where only Chaos and Old Night had existed, the Cadmon now dwelt in
silence, its light stretching to fill the void left by Darkness.** **The
Cadmon encompassed the Void but there were no others there to reflect
the brilliant light of the One.** **In its unity, the Cadmon was alone,
leaving creation incomplete.** **And as life brings forth life, the
Cadmon divided itself to create the Many from the One. In so doing, the
promise of Creation was fulfilled.** Priest lights the candles one by
one as he says**: "And Spirit took on heat and dryness, and became
Fire."** (Priest Lights an altar candle) Response (made by everyone
present):**"Blessed be the Fire."** P: **"And Spirit took on cold and
fluidity, and became Water."** (Priest Lights an altar candle) R:
**"Blessed be the Water."** P: **"And Spirit took on heat and fluidity,
and became Air."** (Priest Lights an altar candle) R: **"Blessed be the
Air."** P: **"And Spirit took on cold and dryness, and became Earth."**
(Priest Lights an altar candle) R: **"Blessed be the Earth."** P:
**"Four manifestations of one Unity, the elements of the body of the
Cadmon."** The lights are turned up a bit so the room is now dim with
candle-light. It must be bright enough for people to move about in the
space. The priest steps back from the altar slightly to give room to
other celebrants. **And Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, the elements of the
body of the Cadmon, followed the Light to fill the Void. There was no
place untouched, and all reflected the beauty and passion of the One.**
**At the center, the balancing point, the Spirit of the Cadmon
remained.** **Creation, in its entirety, was of the Cadmon, and the
Cadmon was of all.** **As above, so below."** Everyone: **As above, so
below.** LM & HM: As the Priest says "And Earth, Air, Fire and
Water...", the following actions occur: LM: The Acolyte, beginning with
the Wine, takes each element in turn *directly* from the central altar
to its station always moving either directly between a station and the
central altar or sunwise. He continues with the Platter, the Rose, and
the Candle of Fire and then returns to the central altar. HM: The
Elemental Officers proceed directly from their stations at the elemental
altars to the central altar and arrive at the side of the central altar
facing their station. They take up the elements and turn sunwise to face
outward. The celebrants carry the Elements to the four quarters and
their altars. They do so by circumambulating sunwise once, in unison and
symmetry, with each officer finishing at the appropriate elemental altar
after one full circle of the space as the celebrants move gradually
outward making a spiral. They put the elements onto their altars and
take up position to the left of each altar. LM & HM: After the Elements
are positioned at the periphery of the space, the Priest speaks. Priest:
**"Our world, in itself perfect and in want of nothing, was the product
of Creation.** **Filled with the beauty of the One become Many, all of
Creation glittered in the light of the dawn.** **The realm in which we
dwell is one which was sacred from the beginning; in all things the
Divine Light can be experienced.** **The cycle of water from sea to
land, to sea;** **the marriage of fire and air; the turning of the
seasons; the cycle of life and death; the adaptation of life to
circumstance.** **And as part of creation, humankind also reflects the
excellence of the Cadmon, and of the Unknowable One.** **In our
existence, we are a continual celebration of the process of Creation."**
**7. Lection.**** Priest: **"The lection for our present service will be
<***fill in with whatever it is***\>."** In LM, the Acolyte then reads
an appropriate passage from the Enneads, Corpus Hermeticum, or other
suitably inspiring literature. In HM, the Lector will do the reading.
**8. Special Intentions**** Special rites following the liturgical
calendar, weddings, rites of remembrance, consecrations, and other
activities will occur here. **9. Reunification.**** Priest: **"We, in
our world, are often so blinded by the darkness that we forget our
divine heritage. Let each one of us remember who we are in the Cadmon,
and seek to align ourselves in a quest for peace, knowledge, and unity
with the vastness of the One. Through our actions we can be participants
in the perfection of Creation; ourselves, our world, our cosmos. Seek
then, to purify yourselves and unify your natures to that purpose.**
**Please repeat with me the principles on which we are founded."** All:
**"That there is a One; the original, transcendent Unity at the heart of
all things, which existed before time, which is the wellspring of
Creation, and within which all things dwell.** **That there is a Body of
the Cadmon, the divine reflection of the One. Neither male nor female
yet containing both, the Cadmon in its perfection divided itself to fill
the Void.** **That all of Creation is part of the Cadmon, and therefore
reflects the supernal Unity which is beyond understanding.** **That all
life is sacred and worthy of respect.** **That the Tree of Life is a map
showing a path of reunification with the One.** **That knowledge of the
One and Creation can be attained through individual effort. We walk the
path of reunification to gain this gnosis for the good of ourselves and
others.** **That inasmuch as the life of the Cadmon can exist in our
world, the Mass of the Elements as a reminder of our roles in the
magnificence of Creation.** Priest:**"Let the elements of the world be
joined together in balance through your endeavoring for unity, in the
presence of Spirit. Let the Cadmon appear as the model for our striving,
as in all we are, and in all we can experience, the Cadmon is reflected.
Find not only new expressions of the radiance of the One, but remember
also the ways it has been experienced in the past. Turn your hearts
toward the vision of supreme excellence and freedom that is the One."**
***The Acolyte (LM) or the Elemental Officers (HM)*** return with the
elements, again circumambulating with the sun once and ending up at the
appropriate side of the altar. They each deposit their element on the
altar, turn 180 degrees, and proceed directly to their station and stand
beside it again (HM). **10. Dedications.**** LM & HM: The Priest and all
others present repeat, in turn, the following dedications. Priest:
**"Let the blessing of the Unity go forth throughout the manifested
universe."** Response: **"Be it so."** P: **"Let the blessing go forth
to all who seek wisdom, and lead them to the source of light."** R:
**"Be it so."** P: **"Let the blessing go forth to all who strive for
the good, and grant them the strength to attain it."** R: **"Be it
so."** P: **"Let the blessing go forth to all who suffer, and give them
healing and peace."** R: **"Be it so."** P: **"Let the blessing go forth
to all who are in need, and bring them fullness of life."** R: **"Be it
so."** P: **"Let the blessing go forth to all who are gathered here
today, members of the body of the Cadmon and of the Church. Let it fill
us with light and life, and guide us in the ways of wisdom. Let courage,
temperance, prudence, and justice illuminate and protect us and may the
recollection of Unity be always with us as we go about the journeys of
our lives."**R: **"Be it so."** (At this point additional dedications,
which are given to the Priest before the service, may be read. There
will also be additional dedications assigned to the various special
activities that may be included in the Mass. All respond to them with
the words **"Be it so"**) P: **"Let the blessing go forth to all."** R:
**"Be it so."** **11. Elemental Communion.**** Priest: **"All that is
left is for us to join in the communion of the elements, the body of the
Cadmon."** The Priest then goes to West of altar and begins the
Communion. Priest: **"Therefore, I invite all beings present, therefore,
to breathe with me the perfume of this Rose, as a symbol of Air."** He
smells the Rose. Priest:**"To feel with me the warmth of this sacred
Fire."** He passes his hand over the flame. Priest: **"To eat with me
this Bread and Salt as types of Earth."** He takes a piece of bread from
the platter, dips it in the salt, and eats it**.** Priest: **"And
finally to drink with me this Wine, emblematic of Water."** He drinks a
cup of wine. When he is finished, the Priest goes sunwise to the East
side of the altar, gives communion to the next person, and then steps
back to the East to allow this person to administer communion to the
person following. The Priest stays in the East until all are finished.
LM: After the Priest takes communion, the Acolyte goes to the West, and
prompts the congregation (if any) to line up for the Communion and
advance one by one. HM: The Lector, the Deacon and the Exorcist (in that
order) circle around to West sunwise and take communion, one after the
other. The Acolyte follows behind Exorcist, but instead of taking
communion, he stays in West and prompts the congregation (if any) to
line up for the communion and proceed. LM & HM: The Acolyte takes
communion last, finishes the wine, and proclaims **"It is finished."**
The Priest returns to the center from the East. **12. Release of
Energies.**** LM: Priest: **"Let the powers of the elements be
released."** The Acolyte then goes to each quarter in turn and traces a
banishing pentagram of the appropriate element. Acolyte (pointing to the
center of the pentagram): **"The Names of the Unity sound forth
throughout the *{{direction}}* quarter of the universe! By the Names and
their power, angels and spirits of the element of *{{element}}*, return
in peace to your abodes."** Priest: **"Let this place be purified with
water and consecrated with fire."** The Acolyte purifies and consecrates
the space exactly as in the beginning. HM: Priest: **"Let the powers of
the elements be released."** The Exorcist then goes to each quarter in
turn with drawn sword and traces a banishing pentagram of the
appropriate element. Exorcist (following each pentagram): **"The Names
of the Unity sound forth throughout the *{{direction}}* quarter of the
universe! By the Names and their power, angels and spirits of the
element of *{{element}}*, return in peace to your abodes."**
Priest****(as Exorcist resumes place)**: "Let this place be purified
with water and consecrated with fire."** The Deacon and Acolyte then
purify and consecrate the space with the water and fire exactly as in
the earlier consecration of the space. **13. The Benediction.****
Priest: **"The Body of the Cadmon reflects the beauty of the One, let
its image go with you now. Seek new understanding of Self, and our
world, for breathing the essence of Unity fills us, and renews our
hearts."** All: **"Nature is the glass reflecting the One, as by the
Moon reflected is the Sun."** Priest: **"May the spirit and power of the
ever-present Light encourage you to walk a steadfast path, uplift your
mind and heart, and bring joy to you in the relentless march of days."**
All: **"I am of the One, the eternal Unity, beautiful and holy."**
Priest: **"May you feel blessed by the presence of the Divine Unknowable
in all things, and may you continue to grow like a blossom in the Sun.
Go now, in the truth of your secret heart."** **14. Exit.**** The priest
extinguishes the four candles around the altar. The celebrants return
directly to the central altar. The priest takes up the Lamp of Spirit
and all of the celebrants process out, following the Priest, in the
order of their entrance with the Acolyte on the very end. They
circumambulate sunwise once and exit the circle in the East and from
there they go into the next room/space.
