---
author: admin
date: '2002-09-09 17:24:00'
layout: post
slug: heh-2
status: publish
title: heh
wordpress_id: '941'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

An amusing blog courtesy of : [True Porn Clerk
Stories](http://www.improvisation.ws/mb/showthread.php?s=b627ddf7bff53053ae23b57b2858366f&threadid=4475)
A sample entry:

> A guy came up to the counter a few days ago and asked me if "Tae Bo"
> was in. I explained that we don't carry exercise videos and he said
> no, no we had it - he'd seen the box downstairs. Downstairs is, of
> course, the porn section. A lot of porn movies do ape titles - "David
> Cop-a-Feel" was my all-time favorite - but not as many as you'd think.
> Most follow a pattern: (A) B N, where A is the race of the
> participants (optional), B is the sex act or kink - sometimes this
> gets astonishingly specific - and N is the number of the series. Thus
> you get "Blow Bang 25" or "Asian All-Anal Action 15". The "Little
> White Chicks, Big Black Monster Dicks" (note intriguing combination of
> race and fetish) series has some of the most offensive cover art I've
> ever seen, not because of the sexual content but because it's
> incredibly racist. The little white chicks look at you demurely over
> their shoulders while surrounded by scowling African-American men. The
> men are repeatedly referred to as "monsters" ("monster dicks" itself
> doesn't bother me because it merely implies that said dicks are
> monstrously large, but referring to men themselves as monsters is
> another story) and their faces are actually mounted on cartoon animal
> bodies. There's no way in hell you could put that cover on, say, a
> book and not get your store burnt down, and perhaps rightly so. But my
> well-meaning liberalism can pretty much go screw itself, as the series
> is cheerfully (and heavily) rented by all races. Anyway, Tae Bo. I
> can't find it in the computer, but that's not unusual - deliberate
> misspellings are common in porn. That, plus the inevitable similarity
> of titles makes it a real pain in the ass to look things up. Does the
> customer want Black Ball, Blackball, Black Balled, Blackballed, Black
> Balls, Blackballs, Black Ballers, BlackBallers, Black Ballz,
> Blackballz, Black Ballerz, or BlackBallerz? And does he want the one
> in the gay section or the one in the straight section? But I keep
> looking. The Zen lesson of my job is this: just because I do not want
> to be a video clerk doesn't mean I shouldn't be the best possible
> video clerk I can be. There's no way to just pop up a partial
> alphabetical list of titles, so you have to pick a likely starting
> point and then flip through entry after entry. "It was a weird
> spelling, right?" I say, still typing in variations on "Tae Bo" as
> fast as I can think of them. "Yes," he says "It was spelled weird."
> "Do you remember it?" Yes, he does: T-A-B-O-O
