---
author: admin
date: '2002-07-30 22:00:00'
layout: post
slug: '71330'
status: publish
title: '71330'
wordpress_id: '901'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

[http://www.theregus.com/content/6/25785.html](http://www.theregus.com/content/6/25785.html)
**Citizens' Open Declaration Against Corporate Injustice** *25 July
2002* Whereas the House of Representatives, the Congress, and the Senate
of the United States of America have repeatedly put forth an effort to
pass pieces of legislation which are clearly designed to assist wealthy
industries in the oppression and usurpation of the common citizen, both
domestic and foreign; Whereas it has been proven that the cost of the
Compact Disc (CD) and other media of content distribution have in fact
risen as a result of corporate profit-minded planning, even in spite of
reduced manufacturing costs arising from the ubiquity of newer and ever
more advanced technology; Whereas the Artists who create and distribute
their Content through RIAA channels are not properly compensated for
their personal efforts, since only a small minority of the funds earned
this way actually profit the artist; Whereas the Recording Industry of
America (RIAA), under the guise of "anti-piracy" efforts, and in an
effort to maximize profit at the expense of Fair Use and consumer
friendliness, have in fact conspired to release nonstandard
copy-protected media such as the "copy protected CD", with the express
intention of hindering, damaging, or otherwise disrupting an electronic
device such as a personal computer; Whereas the Motion Picture
Association of America (MPAA), in cooperation with other entities,
including at least one compromised legislator, has in fact conspired to
legislate a condition of immunity for itself with regard to the
committing of numerous, serious federal offenses via the directing of
Denial Of Service (DoS) attacks at Peer-to-Peer (P2P) networks; Whereas
the above mentioned DoS attacks and other vigilante procedures would
likely cause serious harm to individual computer users and Internet
Service Providers (ISPs); Whereas the passing and continued existence of
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), without further and serious
examination, is expected to erode both the legitimacy of Fair Use
provisions by the State under previous copyright laws, and erode the
onus being on the State to establish the presence and existence of guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt or in a balance of probabilities, in the event
that an offense is believed to have been committed; Whereas the Business
Software Alliance (BSA) is believed to have engaged in actions on behalf
of its members that are harmful to the citizens' freedoms and interests
in terms of enforcing fair copyright legislation, particularly with
respect to the intolerable conditions provided by the DMCA; Whereas the
agenda of Digital Rights Management (DRM) is being forced on citizens
without due process or reasonable grounds; Whereas DRM and all of its
derivatives are dangerous to innovation, copyright, and technological
advance on the grounds that they remove functionality from electronic
devices and further erode Fair Use provisions; Whereas no form of DRM
has been conceived, or even constructed, with the intent of compensating
copyright holders and content creators for alleged acts of "piracy";
Whereas great injustices have been perpetrated by the RIAA and MPAA
against citizens, ISPs, and other entities without proof beyond a
reasonable doubt or on the balance of probabilities that an act of
"piracy" or "copyright infringement" has in fact been committed; Whereas
the BSA, its members, and a number of other commercial software entities
have been continually abusing the U.S. patent system by establishing
circumstances in the development community which hinder, stagnate, or
degrade innovation and the spread of new ideas; Be it resolved that we,
the people, both US citizens and citizens from abroad, hereby declare
the following: (1.) That an unconditional boycott must be made against
key firms, particularly the BSA, RIAA, and MPAA, in an effort to
encourage the establishment of fair and honest business practices, and
to promote nondiscriminatory relations with regard to customers and
end-users; (2.) We demand the retraction or striking down of all
counterproductive legislation such as the DMCA, and reserve the right to
demand such for any similar article or document from the present, past,
or future; (3.) We refuse to recognize any media or content distribution
or creation entity as a legitimate law enforcement agency; (3[i].)-- no
entity besides the rightful government of a state will be granted law
enforcement powers by the State, as the establishment of such would
forseeably undermine citizens' freedoms and democratic rights; (3[ii])--
no entity shall be granted any form of vigilante powers under any
circumstance, by any other entity or the State, as this is strongly
contrary to what a legitimate and free democracy should stand for. (4.)
We reserve the right to enjoy the provisions of "First Sale" and "Fair
Use" protected under existing national and international copyright
conventions; (5.) We find the passing of legislation which allows crime
to be legitimized for any agency for the purpose of personal gain to be
utterly intolerable. (6.) In the event that any entity, corporate or
otherwise, is granted any piece of blatantly oppressive legislation or
vigilante rights, such as the right to commit a federal computer crime
with impunity, the citizens of all nations reserve the right to:
(6[i])-- declare a state of war against that entity and any parties that
share responsibility, whereby "war" is defined as the right to assume
equal rights as those which the oppressor has enacted, and in doing so,
the citizens are entitled to commit at least one retaliatory act in
return for every act made by the "oppressing" entity; (6[i][a])--- any
such state of war will remain in full force until the legislation or
grant of power in question has been reversed or struck down and is
completely eliminated. Proof of such elimination will be required in all
instances.
