---
author: admin
date: '2002-11-12 17:16:00'
layout: post
slug: the-seven-sermons-to-the-dead-sermo-ii
status: publish
title: The Seven Sermons to the Dead, Sermo II
wordpress_id: '1018'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

**Sermo II** In the night the dead stood along the wall and cried: We
would have knowledge of god. Where is god? Is god dead? God is not dead.
Now, as ever, he liveth. God is creatura, for he is something definite,
and therefore distinct from the pleroma. God is quality of the pleroma,
and everything I said of creatura also is true concerning him. He is
distinguished, however, from created beings through this, that he is
more indefinite and indeterminable than they. He is less distinct than
created beings, since the ground of his being is effective fullness.
Only in so far as he is definite and distinct is he creatura, and in
like measure is he the manifestation of the effective fullness of the
pleroma. Everthing which we do not distinguish falleth into the pleroma
and is made void by its opposite. If, therefore, we do not distinguish
god, effective fullness is for us extinguished. Moreover god is the
pleroma itself, as likewise each smallest point in the created and
uncreated is pleroma itself. Effective void is the nature of the devil.
God and devil are the first manifestations of nothingness, which we call
the pleroma. It is indifferent whether the pleroma is or is not, since
in everything it is balanced and void. Not so creatura. In so far as god
and devil are creatura they do not extinguish each other, but stand one
against the other as effective opposites. We need no proof of their
existence. It is enough that we must always be speaking of them. Even if
both were not, creatura, of its own essential distinctiveness, would
forever distinguish them anew out of the pleroma. Everything that
discrimination taketh out of the pleroma is a pair of opposites. To god,
therefore, always belongeth the devil. This inseparability is as close
and, as your own life hath made you see, as indissoluble as the pleroma
itself. Thus it is that both stand very close to the pleroma, in which
all opposites are extinguished and joined. God and devil are
distinguished by the qualities of fullness and emptiness, generation and
destruction. EFFECTIVENESS is common to both. Effectiveness joineth
them. Effectiveness, therefore, standeth above both; is a god above god,
since in its effect it uniteth fullness and emptiness. This is a god
whom ye knew not, for mankind forgot it. We name it by its name ABRAXAS.
It is more indefinite still than god and devil. That god may be
distinguished from it, we name god HELIOS or sun. Abraxas is effect.
Nothing standeth opposed to it but the ineffective; hence its effective
nature freely unfoldeth itself. The ineffective is not, therefore
resisteth not. Abraxas standeth above the sun and above the devil. It is
improbable probability, unreal reality. Had the pleroma a being, Abraxas
would be its manifestation. It is the effective itself, not any
particular effect, but effect in general. It is unreal reality, because
it hath no definite effect. It is also creatura, because it is distinct
from the pleroma. The sun hath a definite effect, and so hath the devil.
Wherefore do they appear to us more effective than indefinite Abraxas.
It is force, duration, change. The dead now raised a great tumult, for
they were Christians.
