---
author: admin
date: '2002-12-11 18:30:00'
layout: post
slug: on-the-veneration-of-the-earth-at-the-winter-solstice
status: publish
title: On the Veneration of the Earth at the Winter Solstice
wordpress_id: '1045'
categories:
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

**On the Veneration of the Earth at the Winter Solstice** Fragments 6 &
7 from "On Images" by Porphyry The ruling principle of the power of
earth is called Hestia, of whom a statue representing her as a virgin is
usually set up on the hearth; but inasmuch as the power is productive,
they symbolize her by the form of a woman with prominent breasts. The
name Rhea they gave to the power of rocky and mountainous land, and
Demeter to that of level and productive land. Demeter in other respects
is the same as Rhea, but differs in the fact that she gives birth to
Kore by Zeus, that is, she produces the shoot from the seeds of plants.
And on this account her statue is crowned with ears of corn, and poppies
are set round her as a symbol of productiveness. . . . But since there
was in the seeds cast into the earth a certain power, which the sun in
passing round to the lower hemisphere drags down at the time of the
winter solstice, Kore is the seminal power, and Pluto the sun passing
under the earth, and traversing the unseen world at the time of the
winter solstice; and he is said to carry off Kore, who, while hidden
beneath the earth, is lamented by her mother Demeter. The power which
produces hard-shelled fruits, and the fruits of plants in general, is
named Dionysus. But observe the images of these also. For Kore bears
symbols of the production of the plants which grow above the earth in
the crops: and Dionysus has horns in common with Kore, and is of female
form, indicating the union of male and female forces in the generation
of the hard shelled fruits. But Pluto, the ravisher of Kore, has a
helmet as a symbol of the unseen pole, and his shortened sceptre as an
emblem of his kingdom of the nether world; and his dog indicates the
generation of the fruits in its threefold division -- the sowing of the
seed, its reception by the earth, its growing up. For he is called a
dog, not because souls are his food, but because of the earth's
fertility, for which Pluto provides when he carries off Kore. Attis,
too, and Adonis are related to the analogy of fruits. Attis is the
symbol of the blossoms which appear early in the spring, and fall off
before the complete fertilization; whence they further attributed
castration to him, from the fruits not having attained to seminal
perfection: but Adonis was the symbol of the cutting of the perfect
fruits. Silenus was the symbol of the wind's motion, which contributes
no few benefits to the world. And the flowery and brilliant wreath upon
his head is symbolic of the revolution of the heaven, and the hair with
which his lower limbs are surrounded is an indication of the density of
the air near the earth. Since there was also a power partaking of the
prophetic faculty, the power is called Themis, because of its telling
what is appointed and fixed for each person. In all these ways, then,
the power of the earth finds an interpretation and is worshipped: as a
virgin and Hestia, she holds the centre; as a mother she nourishes; as
Rhea she makes rocks and dwells on mountains; as Demeter, she produces
herbage; and as Themis, she utters oracles: while the seminal law which
descends into her bosom is figured as Priapus, the influence of which on
dry crops is called Kore, and on soft fruits and shellfruits is called
Dionysus. For Kore was carried off by Pluto, that is, the sun going down
beneath the earth at seed-time; but Dionysus begins to sprout according
to the conditions of the power which, while young, is hidden beneath the
earth, yet produces fine fruits, and is an ally of the power in the
blossom symbolized by Attis, and of the cutting of the ripened corn
symbolized by Adonis. Also the power of the wind which pervades all
things is formed into a figure of Silenus, and the perversion to frenzy
into a figure of a Bacchante, as also the impulse which excites to lust
is represented by the Satyrs. These, then, are the symbols by which the
power of the earth is revealed." ---- translated by Edwin Hamilton
Gifford
