---
author: admin
date: '2002-09-04 18:02:00'
layout: post
slug: vomitron
status: publish
title: Vomitron
wordpress_id: '936'
categories:
- Books
- Daily Life
- Science Fiction
---

A note from a work e-mail today (of all places). The Gravitron is one of
those spinning top sort of rides where the force of the spinning pulls
you up the walls and hangs you there... *My friends and I refer to the
"Space Needle Center Gravitron" as the "Vomitron" after a night that
involved Tequila and the Hurricane diner, but I will spare you all with
the details on that one.* On a different note entirely, I finished
Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche's "Lord of the Dance" a couple of days ago. An
interesting autobiography of a well known Lama. I'm working,
fiction-wise, on reading Caleb Carr's "The Angel of Darkness" right now.
Generally, I read at least one fiction and one non-fiction book at a
time though I sometimes have two non-fiction books on different topics.
I think I'm getting Dharma-burn-out from all of my reading so I'm going
to read a book on the history of Pirates ("Under the Black Flag" or
something similar) that I found used yesterday and maybe "Bowling Alone"
which I bought a year or so ago but never got around to reading. It is
about the breakdown of community in America. I also read an amusing, to
me, story from Salon last night. It's
[0wnz0red](http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2002/08/28/0wnz0red/index.html).
It would probably be a lot less amusing outside of the tech industry and
the Extropian, Trans-humanist crowd. It was a fun read though. Other
than that, the only big thing that I'm doing in next month is flying to
Minneapolis at the end of the month to participate in the initiation of
a friend into the former-Aurum Solis Commandery that I'm a member of.
I'm glad that I've gotten to work with that group of people and I
haven't seen them since May of last year.
