---
author: admin
date: '2002-04-29 05:13:00'
layout: post
slug: the-weekend
status: publish
title: The Weekend
wordpress_id: '803'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/tara-img4.gif)This weekend I
attended the Green Tara empowerment that I mentioned recently with given
by Her Eminence Dagmo Kusho Jamyang Sakya. This was a very interesting
experience for me and I went into it without a lot of expectations. I
know that Green Tara is one of the most common empowerments given to
people and that her practices are fairly simple for the most part. I was
quite impressed by Her Eminence. She's a lay practitioner, the wife of
the the head of the Sakya Monastery in Seattle, and she is quite humble
about her background and experience, downplaying it extensively. It's
clear that she has a real and strong connection to Tara and her
teachings and practices. She's been encouraged and empowered to teach by
those who would normally be considered "higher" than her. She teaches at
the [Tara-Ling Center](http://www.taraling.com) in Los Angeles and
apparantly goes down there quite often to do so. You can read about Her
Eminence [here](http://www.taraling.com/Dagmola.html). She's quite the
real deal and it was apparant from what I received this Saturday. Next
weekend is the Shitro teaching and empowerment that I've written about.
I've been debating about whether to attend the Hevajra initiation and
teachings at the end of May or not. The money isn't an issue (even
though it is $150 or $200) really given the nature of it and its
importance. It is whether I can commit to the daily practice that they
will want and whether I'm ready to really receive it. I'm not certain.
While I am getting more involved in Tibetan Buddhism and want to learn
and practice more, my commitment to Buddhism as a life-path isn't
necessarily fully there and I want to respect the tradition and its
teachings properly. This isn't something to do on a lark. To receive the
Green Tara empowerment is in an entirely different class of things than
to receive the Hevajra Initiation. Later on Saturday, I attended 's
lecture on the history of the Ordo Templi Orientis here at Horizon Oasis
in Seattle. The lecture was very good and I didn't heckle, even when he
called me out and tried to get me to do so at one point. So there. The
end of the evening and into Sunday morning was spent with R. We rented
and watched "Zoolander" of all things and were pleasently surpised by
how funny it actually was! ;-) I spent Sunday goofing around for the
most part. I tried to arrange to see my daughter but my ex didn't answer
calls to her cell and messages I left there and at her home. I have no
idea what the hell was going on there but I'm trying not to be annoyed.
My ex-wife always gives me shit about spending more time with my
daughter though so it is kind of hard not to feel annoyed about it. I
wound up hanging out in the sun reading since it was a rather nice day
for Spring in Seattle. R had gone into work because they are near
shipping so we met up later on to get some food and go to the new Sunday
poi class for advanced students. Turnout was a bit low there but we had
a good time even though I got hit in the head by someone **else's**
flailing poi during partner practice repeatedly. I don't mind as long as
we don't repeat it when the poi are on fire... As you can see, it is
quite late so I think I'll be going to bed soon... Update: I found [this
article](http://www.taraling.com/DagmalaArticle.pdf) on the Tara-Ling
site from the LA Times about Her Eminence.
