---
author: admin
date: '2002-10-26 03:25:00'
layout: post
slug: crimethinc
status: publish
title: CrimethInc.
wordpress_id: '997'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Society
---

I've decided I like these guys. It revives my dying anarchist spirit
that my career has sucked from my fucking soul. I'm on a Daniel Quinn
list with some of them and they turn out to be fairly local to me. Check
them out! [http://crimethinc.com/](http://crimethinc.com/) - Their main
website.
[http://www.buyolympia.com/crimethinc](http://www.buyolympia.com/crimethinc/)
Where you can buy their books, flyers, news-rags. I'm ordering some now.
There is a web community at
[www.crimethinc.net](http://www.arcanology.com/http:/www.crimethinc.net)
as well. I'll quote the FAQ now... Move on if you couldn't care less...
Some frequently asked questions, answered by CrimethInc. Secret-ary of
the Interior Nadia C.

* * * * *

[Dear CrimethInc. Collective, I wrote you a long letter, and after four
months I still havent gotten a reply. I want to participate in the
collective, but I dont know what to do! Please tell me!](#a) [When was
CrimthInc. started? What was its original goal?](#b) [How are decisions
made inside the CrimethInc.? How are responsiblities divided up?](#c)
[How many people are involved in CrimethInc.?](#d) [What if any are the
qualifications for joining?](#e) [When I first heard about yall, and,
say, Inside Front, the whole thing came off to me as being a bit
cultish. How would you respond to people who say your image is
exclusionary and, well, cult like?](#f) [People are generally not
credited for their involvement with your organization. Whats the logic
behind that, and how do you feel this could effect long term involvement
with CrimethInc.? Do you even worry about long term involvement?](#g)
[Does CrimethInc. have a platform or political ideology? If so, what is
it?](#h)******

* * * * *

***Dear CrimethInc. Collective, I wrote you a long letter, and after
four months I still havent gotten a reply. I want to participate in the
collective, but I dont know what to do! Please tell me!*** First, I want
to apologize to all the people who have had to wait for responses to
their letters. We try to keep on top of the vast amounts of mail
arriving at our various addresses, but its difficultÑin order for the
orders, for books and literature to get out on time, people who write
personal letters have to wait a long time sometimes (although thats the
opposite of how it should be, perhaps). I'll let you in on a little
secret: this isnt a big organization with an office, a budget, and a
forty hour work week for all the secretaries. Everyone who answers the
CrimethInc. mail and email is involved in a hundred other projects.
We're not interested in becoming more efficient, because were all
committed to living full, adventurous lives, without division of labor
or acceptance, of productivity as a valueÑrather, we hope to empower
others to be able to do everything themselves, so efficiency on our part
will be unnecessary. The last thing we want is to have the work here
divided up into official tasks for different posts, as if we were
employees. That also means that we dont have roles waiting for people
who want to join CrimethInc. The C.W.C. is totally decentralized. That
means if you want to be involved, you should pick something you think
CrimethInc. should do, and start doing it. If you need our help with
something (getting copies of Harbinger to distribute, getting hints
about how to make your own stickers for free, finding addresses of
housing collectives you should visit to learn how to organize your own,
getting one of our bands to play at your house) well be happy to give
it, thats what this is all about. But it'll be a lot easier for us to
offer if you already know what youre trying to do. There may come a day,
you know, when there is no one answering mail or sending out zines, when
every CrimethInc. group becomes a splinter of the CrimethInc. Action
Faction (the chapter of the C.W.C. notorious for eschewing all rhetoric
and declarations in favor of just doing things, with the medium of
activity being the message itself). On that day everyone will be in the
streets serving free food or in the communes kissing or playing music,
everyone will pronounce himself or herself Commander in Chief of
CrimethInc., no one will need to be at the center sending out magazines
and books and advice. The sooner that day comes, the better. In the
meantime, what we need most are people writing us who know what we
should be doing better than we do. In the end, it is not us, but you who
decide your own level of involvement. On the other hand, please don't be
intimidated about writing to us about anything. Just understand why we
take so long to write back, and why we may not have all the answers for
you. Whose revolution is this, anyway? Yours! ******

* * * * *

***When was CrimthInc. started? What was its original goal?***
CrimethInc. began in the mid-1990's. I can't report on the original
goals of all the participants, but I can trace my own initial intentions
to a discussion among some friends about the revolutionary organization
Winston joins in Orwell's 1984. The idea came up that it was actually a
branch of the government... and from there, we began to consider what
the opposite kind of organization would be (one that purported to be a
part of the culture industry that rules today, while secretly
undermining it), and how to form one. The irony, the margin-walking
between contradictions, both were intrinsic to CrimethInc. from the
beginning... and honestly, I can tell you no better now than I could
have then whether we are just indulging reactionary desires by forming
yet another "revolutionary organization," or heroically helping humanity
to evolve past the despoticism of such a thing by
detourning/deconstructing the idea of the revolutionary organization.
******

* * * * *

***How are decisions made inside the CrimethInc.? How are
responsiblities divided up?*** We are different from your average
collective in that we do not vote democratically on things, nor do we
seek consensus for its own sake. When consensus is sought, it is not to
appease other participants, but rather to get their ideas and
perspectives. The collective functions like an anarchist village in that
individuals within it work on whatever projects they want, seeking help
from others when they desire it (that's how responsibilities are chosen
and shared, not assigned like they are in some Communist parties); but
the really utopian aspect of our dis-Organization is that, unlike in a
village in which everyone's survival depends on cooperation and
participation, departure from the group/working outside the group have
no really negative consequences for anyone. This means that, to date,
there has been very little squabbling about what we should do and how...
those who have ideas of what they believe CrimethInc. should do work on
them together in small teams, in a constantly shifting net of
responsibilities. Resources are shared as they are in a gift economy,
according to the needs of the various projects. This requires plenty of
planning, to make things work out, but thus far not much conflict.
Admittedly, power tends to centralize itself in the hands of those who
have been involved the longest, but (unlike in a fascist or traditional
democratic environment) there is no scarcity of power, since anyone can
start her own CrimethInc. group and develop resources and knowledge of
her own to share. This reflects my own personal idealistic dream, that
we can create a world in which power itself is no more a scarcity
resource than food, love, or selfhood. ******

* * * * *

***How many people are involved in CrimethInc.?*** That's the most
difficult question of all. Since we pretentiously consider ourselves a
social phenomenon, rather than a movement or (heaven forbid!) a
membership club, we prefer not to answer it. I have personal experience
working with a little over a thousand different people on CrimethInc.
projects of varying seriousness, from mailing along fliers to be given
away to writing and publishing 'zines and books. Of those thousand
people, I would describe all of them as being involved in CrimethInc.,
but only a hundred or so would probably have the admirable audacity to
claim CrimethInc. as something of their own the way I do. ******

* * * * *

***What if any are the qualifications for joining?*** One doesn't need
qualifications for "joining" a social phenomenon--it's something that
happens in the course of practice. If someone contacts us to get some
posters, wheatpastes them up around town, enjoys it, and designs their
own posters for the next wheatpasting, putting the CrimethInc. logo on
the posters for whatever reasons of their own, they have effectively
"joined" CrimethInc. If they get along with another CrimethInc. "member"
who has been doing similar projects for a long time and has a means to
steal photocopies available, she will probably provide the photocopying
for the next generation of posters, and there you have CrimethInc.
organization at work--totally decentralized and autonomous. The
criticism that this could result in the "CrimethInc." label being
applied to just about anything frequently arises from those used to
working in groups that march under a certain ideology. To march under an
ideology, you need constant bickering about what the specific goals,
motives, logistics, and rhetoric must be, from all involved. But since
we are not trying to do that, autonomous action is much simpler.
Consider the "anarchist movement" as a whole as another example--what
"anarchism" is is basically de facto decided by those who call
themselves anarchists. Certain anarchist parties (a phenomenon some see
as a contradiction in terms) may agree on partuicular tenets of their
own, but in general the nature of the phenomenon is decided and adjusted
at every moment by those who act within it. In our experience, people
come to be involved with CrimethInc. projects through a sort of
self-selecting process: those who are interested in or inspired by what
we have done before come to us, bringing their own new ideas and
inspirations. We want CrimethInc. to be something constantly evolving
and changing, to be a vast, beautiful monster that contains the same
contradictions within it that we do within ourselves as individuals, so
little effort is made to "police" the activities individuals do under
the name. The identity of CrimethInc., if it must have one, can thus be
described not by a set of characteristics or rules, but rather by the
historical process which has been its development as new ideas and
activities grew out of the old ones (again, just like in the anarchist
community). Incidentally, this was the only way Hume thought the
identity of an individual human being could be explained: from birth to
death, nothing is constant (as all the cells of the body are constantly
dying and being replaced, memories forgotten, mind states shifting...)
except for the process of living and evolving, the chain of events which
actually goes back far before conception and extends in every other
direction throughout the world as well. In the same sense, since
CrimethInc. is not the intellectual property of any one group of people,
we consider our projects "communalized" as a part of the cosmos--thus,
"CrimethInc." can belong to anyone who sees a part of herself reflected
within our actions. ******

* * * * *

***When I first heard about yall, and, say, Inside Front, the whole
thing came off to me as being a bit cultish. How would you respond to
people who say your image is exclusionary and, well, cult like?*** I
hope I've already dealt with the "exclusionary" issue--we actually
practice NO exclusion, and although individual members can choose not to
associate with others this does not make CrimethInc. itself exclusive.
The intellectual language I'm using here to get these ideas across is
admittedly exclusive, as all dialects are--but I am to blame for that,
not CrimethInc. As for the charge that, despite our non-exclusive
policies, CrimethInc. is cultish... perhaps that is true, who knows?
Given there are some pernicious things about revolutionary organizations
in the first place: they tend to gather glory for themselves (when they
are really just myths constructed out of the actions of individuals),
they can be as seductive and dangerous to "rally around" as flags or
ideologies... Our experiment here is, rather than denying our desires to
be part of a group with revolutionary pretentions (desires which I feel
are negative, dangerous, spawned from living in a world of teams and
nations and clubs), to similaneously indulge and subvert that desire--by
participating in a revolutionary organization which is avowedly a myth,
which is up front about being anti-organization. My own experience is
that beating yourself up (in the best Christian tradition) for having
the "wrong" desires does no good--it is much better to find ways to put
yourself in new situations which can foster new and different desires
within you, and this is our undertaking here. Perhaps we will end up
becoming just another reactionary cult, but for us this is a new
experiment, and thus worth it. ******

* * * * *

***People are generally not credited for their involvement with your
organization. Whats the logic behind that, and how do you feel this
could effect long term involvement with CrimethInc.? Do you even worry
about long term involvement?*** For me, one of the primary values of
using the CrimethInc. label is the anonymity it provides. In this
society, in which any action is seen to glorify the individual at the
expense of others (see scenester fame in the punk community for a good
example, or celebrities in the mainstream if you need a basic primer in
the concept), it is a wonderful thing to have a name I can sign to a
project that offers credit for the project to anyone who wants to share
that name with me. Thus, I escape being singled out for praise and
recognition as someone who does something, the implications of that
praise and recognition being that others are not "activists" like
myself. In another world this would not be an issue, but we have a
"scarcity economy of self" in this society, thanks to our our
spectacular economy and the values of competition. Being able to escape
being put on a pedastal for my work saves me that embarassment, and
others the humiliation of seeing me as "above" them. There are a
thousand other reasons for anonymity, such as doubts about the validity
of the concept of "authorship" itself (in a world in which everything is
intrinsically connected, especially ideas), but let's not go into those
now. As for worrying about long-term involvement, we don't. The
"CrimethInc." label can be set down as instantly as it has been picked
up, should it prove unnecessary at some point to any or all of
us--assuming we do not fall for our own cover story (as the agent in
William Burrough's books always does) and get carried away by the
mythical grandeur of our fabrication, that is. ******

* * * * *

***Does CrimethInc. have a platform or political ideology? If so, what
is it?*** As I've described above, CrimethInc. has no platform or
ideology except that which could be generalized from the similarities
between the beliefs and goals of the individuals who choose to be
involved--and that is constantly in flux. For that reason, you could
call it an anarchist organization, if you like, although only in the
original sense of the term.
