---
author: admin
date: '2002-10-09 19:49:00'
layout: post
slug: ecstasis
status: publish
title: Ecstasis
wordpress_id: '973'
categories:
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---
I found this over on <a href="http://www.shadowplayzine.com">http://www.shadowplayzine.com</a> last week. There's quite a bit of goodness there. It's an article about the assumption of the Godform from a pagan perspective really. It's an interesting piece.
<h3>ECSTASIS</h3>
<strong>An Article on Channeling
by Rhea Shemazi & Ted Gill - Copyright 1991</strong>

<strong>
The word "Channeling"</strong>

This is the word we picked to represent the many allied skills/experiences
of which we are writing. Its over-use in the New Age press causes some
reluctance in this choice but it has the benefit of being otherwise fairly
neutral in meaning. Many of the people who engage in the processes we are
defining as "channeling" may disagree with our use of this term. We mean no
offense or disrespect, but are merely seeking a word which provides a common
denominator to discuss the topic.

<strong>
CHANNELING: Some Context</strong>

Channeling is a form of religious ecstasy wherein communication and
communion with deity and the spirit world is embraced. It is a mystical
experience which is best comprehended by direct personal experience. The
ecstatic experience - of contact with deity - is, within the Craft, one of
the central and pivotal mysteries. As such, access to the specific keys or
technology of channeling is carefully guarded. As Sagana once said in a
discussion on initiation "you can say whatever you like about the mysteries
(people won’t understand what they’ve not experienced); what we guard within
the Craft are the secrets, which are procedural things to do with the
mysteries."

Within coven training, the novice will experience the High Priest/ess, and
possibly other elders, channeling the Goddess and God of the Craft. The
novice will, under carefully controlled conditions, be introduced to these
energies. Gradually, once initiated, their training will approach the place
where they lead a circle for the first time and perform the "Drawing Down of
the Moon" and other rites where channeling of deity may occur. It is only at
the moment of truth, when it happens for them, that they know what degree of
"possession", they will both experience and be comfortable with.

This phenomenon may be accompanied by a range of experiences - all the way
from a tingling feeling over the whole body, a feeling of intoxication, of
being "cloaked" in the presence of the deity, to the sensation of weight on
the shoulders and pressure on the back of the neck, concluding in complete
occupation of their body by the deity, who will then often have things to
say to individual celebrants or to the coven as a whole.

This is not to imply that channeling, or "possessory work" as it is also
known, only occurs in the context of a coven. This is simply the place where
it is most commonly seen within the Craft. Some pagan festivals are designed
to re-create a specific mystery tradition where possession or ecstasy were
historically common. It is possible at such events to see this kind of work
done.

Channeling requires both talent and fine control. In Ecstatic Religion
(Lewis, 1971) it is stressed that a shaman is a master of spirits, "with the
implication that this inspired priest incarnates spirits, becoming possessed
voluntarily in controlled circumstances., ..., The apprentice shaman must
also learn how to attain enlightenment or "light", that mysterious luminous
fire which the shaman suddenly feels in his body and which enables him to
see all that is otherwise hidden from mortal eyes. This gift of
illumination, in return for a surrendering of the self or part of the self,
described in the classical language of mysticism as gnosis - a fusing of man
and divinity - is part of controlled spirit possession everywhere."

While I would argue against surrendering any part of the Self (your core
identity), holding the view that this Self is (and should be) inviolate, the
concept of surrender (in whole or part) of the physical vessel, the body,
for a specific period of time and purpose follows the pattern suggested by
Lewis.

The priest/ess in Wicca makes a compact, a contractual relationship, with
the deity they work with. One of the most important aspects of this contract
is that it is a negotiated contract. This special relationship may develop
into one like a spiritual marriage. "Ecstatic communion is thus essentially
a mystical union; and, as the Song of Solomon and other mystical poetry so
abundantly illustrate, experiences of this kind are frequently described in
terms borrowed from erotic love." (Lewis, 1971)

Imagine, if you will, that you are a lens, attracting and focusing a the
light of the sun. The finer the lens, the clearer the light shines through
it. The light (of deity) is so bright, however, that it will show every
imperfection and flaw in your character. The process of preparing for this
ecstasis is like that undertaken by a lens maker, finely grinding and
polishing the crystal until it is as nearly perfect as possible. Imagine how
much clearer the stars are viewed through a powerful telescope, than through
binoculars or the naked eye. Likewise, imagine how much clearer a channel
the trained priest/ess is.

There is always the possibility of a person working in this area becoming
destabilized, and this is what all the cautions are aimed at. No one wants a
student to come "unstuck" on them, to lose touch with reality, to become
dysfunctional both within a Wiccan and societal context. To return to our
lens analogy, if the glass shatters and fragments it is a delicate task to
put the pieces back together again.

<strong>Some Warnings Up Front:</strong>
<blockquote>1. Channeling in any form is a powerful and potentially hazardous
practice. It tends to be addictive, or at least extremely seductive, and
can result in ego inflation, personal identification with deity and other
psychic and psychological aberrations. As with any power source, it should
be used sparingly and with extreme caution.

2 Effective and safe channeling depends on good magickal discipline.
Proficiency at grounding, centering, visualization, elemental balancing
etc. should be well established before engaging in such work.
Psychological imbalances in the practitioner can result in intense,
undesirable, and unexpected side-effects and reactions to this practice.
The severity of such effects is substantially reduced by complete and
effective grounding both before and after opening to channel.

3. Until considerable experience is gained in this practice it is best to
always have a "trusted other", that is, a backup, when channeling is
anticipated to occur. This person should be briefed and rehearsed on what
to do in the event something unexpected happens.

4. It is not a good practice to depend on your coven to "catch" you when
you channel, that is, to ground and re-center you. Of course we expect our
coven-mates to look out for us in such situations. However, continually
having to depend someone else to re-establish our equilibrium for us
indicates laziness or a lack of ability to take care of ourselves —
neither are advisable in this sort of work.

5. Don’t expect all entities which can be channeled to have your best
interests at heart. Your body/spirit is your home, you should neither give
it away nor let it be ransacked by a stranger.</blockquote>
<strong>PREPARATION</strong>

<strong>Personal / Psychic Preparation </strong>

<strong>(Know Yourself)</strong>
<blockquote>- Be (or become) psychologically clear and balanced

- Don’t overlook getting therapy (Some deities are bad therapists — don’t
wait to find out)

- Develop your magickal skills (centering, grounding, breathing, working
with energy, protection, movement, sound, concentration, visualization,
tools, creating sacred space etc.) They should be automatic and require
minimal conscious control.</blockquote>
<strong>Intellectual Preparation </strong>

<strong>(Know your deity!)</strong>

Do good, in-depth research to discover the WHO, WHAT, WHEN, WHERE, & WHY of
the deity you are going to work with.

<u>Worshippers</u>:
<blockquote>Who worshipped the deity? Why?</blockquote>
<blockquote>What was/is their history?</blockquote>
<u> </u>

<u>Geography</u>:
<blockquote>Is it arid, tropical, mountainous, temperate?</blockquote>
<u>Place of Origin of the deity</u>:
<blockquote>Geography, archaeology, importance to the deity / worshippers</blockquote>
<u>Chronography</u>:
<blockquote>Earliest mention of the deity

Changes through time - why did they happen?

Some deities are imported to cultures which don’t really understand them - watch for this.

Absorption by or of other deities</blockquote>
<u>Name of the deity</u>:
<blockquote>What is its meaning?

What variants of the name are there

Are there sub-names, titles, or epithets?
(The variation of names often represents absorption of local deities into
the form of a more general deity. These local deities can have very
different temperaments. Work for maximum specificity!)</blockquote>
<u>Form of worship</u>:
<blockquote>Specific gestures, postures, motions, etc.

Sacrifice? Of what? How messy is it?

Sex? With whom or what? For how long?

Drugs, sacred foods and drinks

Processionals, dances, flagellation,

Indulgence, abstinence, profligacy, asceticism,

You name it, it’s been done in the name of a deity.

Are YOU willing to do it? Is there an alternative or substitute?

Does the deity actually <u>care</u> what you do (some don’t)</blockquote>
<u>What IS important to the deity, anyway?</u>
<blockquote>Season, day, time, plant, animal, stone, metal, color, fabric, geographic
location, type of terrain, number.

Does the deity relate to other deities? If so, better look <u>them</u> up
too.</blockquote>
<u>Sources</u>:
<blockquote>Where to go to find the information you need.

(You are probably going to find that if you want to do serious work you’re
likely to get real familiar with the library before it’s over. This is
particularly true if you are interested in little-known deity forms or
well-known ones who have been poorly researched.

Libraries are actually very friendly places and are staffed by people who
are paid to help YOU find what you are looking for, whatever it may be)

<u>Primary Sources</u>:

The people themselves

Their texts

<u>Secondary Sources</u>:

Scholars who have translated the texts & their opinions

Anthropologists mostly - beware of cultural bias.

Archaeologist who have uncovered their homes, temples, and art & their
opinions.

<u>Tertiary sources</u>:

Encyclopaedias - a good place to start

Comparative religionists - Mircea Eliade for example

Comparative mythographers - such as Joseph Campbell

<u>Popular sources</u>:

Good for points of view, and for pointing you in the right direction. BAD
for the level of detail, accuracy, and specificity required in research
for channeling.</blockquote>
<h3>PRELIMINARIES</h3>
Having done, or at least gotten a good start on the research (It’s never
really <u>done</u> in our experience) begin introducing yourself to the
deity. Introductions are extremely important. It is necessary to build
rapport with the deity just as you would with any new acquaintance.
<blockquote><u>Perform devotionals</u>

These don’t have to be big, just a greeting and acknowledgement are all
that is necessary. Sincerity counts most of all. Devotionals are <u>not</u>
meant to be occasions for channeling. We are merely setting the stage.
<blockquote>- Set up a shrine (your research should guide you)

- Speak a greeting to the deity

- Perform an adoration of the deity (any or all of the following can be
included)

- Spoken words

- Gestures/postures

- Visualizations of the divinity or a symbol

- Offerings (incense, sacramental food)</blockquote>
<u>Negotiate</u>

Either before or during the channeling (particularly the first time)
establish the ground rules with the divinity. If they want more than you
are willing to give STOP. This involves specifying what you are willing to
do for/with the divinity and for how long as well as what you expect from
them. An entity you invite into your body doesn’t own you.

I’ve never heard of a case where a true deity wasn’t willing to engage in
negotiation, although some will gloss over the point if it isn’t brought
up. One of the reasons why the Witch’s word is his or her bond is because
of the potential consequences of breaking your word to a deity. Don’t give
your word lightly to a deity and above all keep it.

CHANNELING: The Practice

<u>Controls:</u>

1. Always work in a space that is magically prepared by having been
cleansed, consecrated, and sealed. To fail to do this invites the most
unpleasant experiences with entities you never wanted to meet in the first
place.

2. Make sure that you are physically and psychically prepared for the
working. Channeling can be exhausting.

3. Make sure that you have provided yourself with personnel and materials
(salt, food, blankets, juice) to stop the working, ground the energy, and
tend to your physical and psychic needs in the event all does not go
according to plan.

4. Provide yourself, in advance, with a plan so you can <u>tell</u>
whether or not things are going according to plan.</blockquote>
Notes on the process:

Use everything you know about the deity to enhance the atmosphere of the
circle and make it desirable/recognizable to the deity of interest. As many
of your senses should be engaged by this as possible. Incense, gestures,
chants, music, food, pictures, and symbols, all of it should connect with
the deity so that the deity can experience it through their contact with
you.

A number of physical sensations have been experienced by those who engage in
this sort of work. A particular individual may experience any number of them
or something completely different. Be flexible. Use all of your senses.

It has always been appropriate to make some sort of offering to deity. By
virtue of the process of channeling an offering is made but that is not
necessarily the offering the deity wants. Ask the deity. Again, negotiate.
Gobs of pure gold are hard to come by these days. If that’s what the deity
wants you may need to find a substitute. Explain the problem. Many
pre-Christian deities aren’t familiar with the concept of "personal
relationship to deity." Priest/esses are expected to have large supporting
theocracies to provide them with the wherewithal to make offerings. Times
have changed and deities seem to be able to hear this. Sincerity really does
count.
<blockquote><strong><u>Basic ideas for offerings</u>:</strong>

- Your body

- Your worship and that of your circle

- Your energy by whatever means you may raise it (dance, sex)

- The deity’s accustomed gifts, Cedar-of-

Lebanon oil, for example

- New offerings from the current place/time, Northwest cedar oil, for
example. This makes the bridge to here/now.

Deities can be surprised, particularly if they are obscure and relatively
un-worshipped. The first time they make the scene in the nineties it may
subject them to something that looks a lot like culture shock. Be prepared
for this (more offerings seem to work.) They may not be used to
manifesting is a body which is of the gender of the priest/ess. The
surroundings may be unfamiliar. This can cause some instability in the
manifestation. Give the deity a chance to stop having a cow, but don’t be
afraid to stop the channel if it isn’t stable and the person indicates
that they need help. It’s always better to bail out and try again some
other time than to risk the stability of the person involved.</blockquote>
<strong>Some Of The Entities "Out There"</strong>

The reason for a fully consecrated, sealed circle, is selectivity. The
circle is only open in the direction decided by the celebrants, and most
particularly, the High Priest/ess or whoever is center-polar for the ritual.
There are many beings, entities, wraiths, otherworldly beings, spirits and
phantasms, angels, daemons, nature spirits, godlings and elementals "out
there" as well as deities (both well disposed and otherwise).

<strong>Some Emergency Procedures For Experienced Guides / Helpers:</strong>

It is crucial that the High Priest/ess be prepared to carry out emergency
procedures for a circle where channeling is planned. It is well to realize
that any time invocation is intended the deity may well decide to visit.
Emergency action may be necessary when a first experience with deity is
planned, or when something gets out of hand. Below are listed some actions
which will tend to stop a channel and ground the practitioner:
<blockquote>1. If the priest/ess hasn’t taken off the jewellery specific to the deity,
remove it.

2. If they are standing, press downwards on the shoulders, "catching" the
deity, and grounding it out.

3. If they are losing balance during a channeling, lower them to the
ground. Wait to see if further action is required (i.e. if they are in
distress and signal you).

4. Salt on the tongue will bring a person back to themselves; as will
vitamin C powder (the ascorbic acid acts as a sufficient shock to
re-awaken the body’s defences).

5. Blow in their ears, balance energy between the base of the neck and
their "centre".

6. Strike a bell behind them, at base of spine, spiraling the sound up the
spine.

7. Consecrate the wine and cakes and ensure that they partake of them.
Food and wine (or juice) will help.

8. Call them by their circle name. If necessary, put them in the center of
an energy chant, calling them by all their own names, nicknames etc,
reminding them who they are.</blockquote>
Always be sure that the person actually requires your assistance, and never
interfere with the officer of the circle who is responsible for this. It’s
best to ask a person who is dealing with such an experience if they need
help, rather than just wading in. A team of people accustomed to working
together in these circumstances is terrific, especially for a large-scale
festival situation. Remember that the wrong action in such circumstances can
be worse than no action at all. If in doubt, the safest things to do are:

<strong>Offer the person:</strong>
<blockquote>
<blockquote>
<blockquote>
<blockquote>- Salt, food, drink</blockquote>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<blockquote>- Hot tea/coffee/soup</blockquote>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<blockquote>- A warm blanket

- Rescue remedy</blockquote>
</blockquote>
</blockquote>
</blockquote>
Wait to be helpful if necessary, but don’t intrude unless asked. Leave
anything else to those most experienced.

<strong>Summary:</strong>

The tremendous explosion of written information on magickal and religious
experience has brought the practice of channeling and related activities out
of the darkness. This darkness came from both disbelief in the validity of
the practice and the careful guarding of its methods and goals by those who
possessed these secrets. It has become apparent that there are a great many
cultures/religions which engage in processes which look similar and yield
results which are fairly consistent. The information which is usually
lacking is the specific methodology by which these groups control the
process. There is a very wide range of intensity in the channeling process.
In some cases the intensity which would be normal in some cultures or
religious systems can possibly extend beyond the comfort or safety level of
those of us who are attempting to live in Western culture. It is actually
not terribly difficult to establish communion and communication with the
"Spirit World." The problems usually arise from the lack of knowledge,
training, experience, and discipline required to maintain the desired level
of control of the process. The information about these aspects tends to be
closely guarded by those who have won them by trial-and-error or received
them through oral tradition and private training. We have attempted here to
shed some light on some of the issues involved, as well as some techniques
which can enhance the safety and control of the process.

<hr /><u>Afterword</u>: This document was written by Rhea Shemazi and Ted Gill.
Copyright 1991 by <a href="mailto:shemazi@hotmail.com">Rhea</a> and Ted
