---
author: admin
date: '2002-09-06 03:11:00'
layout: post
slug: a-teaching-on-kurukulla-by-john-reynolds
status: publish
title: A Teaching on Kurukulla by John Reynolds
wordpress_id: '939'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
---

From
[http://www.angelfire.com/vt/vajranatha/kurukulla.html](http://www.angelfire.com/vt/vajranatha/kurukulla.html),
a teaching by John Reynolds aka Vajranatha:

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/Kurukulla1.jpg)

## KURUKULLA

## The Dakini of Magic and Enchantments

## By John Myrdhin Reynolds

### The Passionate Lotus Dakini Kurukulla

One Buddhist Dakini originating from the country of Uddiyana is the
goddess Kurukulla. The name Kurukulla is translated into Tibetan as
Rigjyedma (rig-byed-ma), “she who is the cause knowledge.” She is
associated with a king of Uddiyana named Indrabhuti. But there were at
least three Indrabhutis and this is most likely the second one.
Moreover, there exists a sadhana text attributed to him for the red
Kurukulla in her eight-armed form. [7] But whether she had eight arms or
four arms, she is generally known as the Uddiyana Kurukulla. Most modern
scholars believe this indicates that Kurukulla was originally a tribal
goddess, much like the Hindu goddess Durga had been in India, who later,
because of her popularity, became associated with the Buddhist great
goddess Tara. For this reason, Kurukulla is often called the Red Tara
(sgrol-ma dmar-po) or Tarodbhava Kurukulla, “the Kurukulla who arises
from Tara.”

### The Magical Function of Enchantment

Kurukulla appears to have become popular originally, and she remains so
even among the Tibetans today, because of her association with the
magical function of enchantment (dbang gi ‘phrin-las) or the bewitching
of people in order to bring them under one’s power (dbang du bsdud).
More than any other figure in the Buddhist pantheon, Kurukulla becomes
the Buddhist goddess of love and sex, corresponding to the Western
gooddesses Aphrodite and Venus. She is depicted as a voluptuous and
seductive nude sixteen year old girl. Among the attributes she holds in
her four hands, four arms being her most common manifestation, are the
flower-entwined bow and arrow, reminiscent of the Western Eros and
Cupid, although as the goddess of witchcraft, she is more akin to Diana.
It may appear strange and ironic to us that Buddhism, originally the
religion of celibate monks, should give birth to this attractive and
seductive sex goddess. Buddhism as a spiritual path is ultimately
concerned with enlightenment and liberation from Samsara. This ultimate
goal is known as the supreme attainment or siddhi (mchog gi dngos-grub).
But not all Buddhist practitioners are celibate monks living in
semi-permanent meditation retreat isolated from the world. Like everyone
else, Buddhists must deal with the practical circumstances of life and
society. Sadhana or deity invocation is a meditation and ritual practice
where the practitioner in meditation assumes the aspect or form of the
deity, who is regarded as a manifestation of the enlightened awareness
of the Buddha, and then invokes the spiritual powers and wisdom and
capacities of that particular deity as an aid to realizing liberation
and enlightenment. This Deity Yoga, or assuming in one’s meditation the
archetypal form of the deity, is considered a particularly powerful
method to accelerate one’s spiritual evolution. The meditation image of
the deity visualized by the practitioner in sadhana, being an archetype
or manifestation of enlightened awareness, and this radiant image opens
a channel and acts as a receptacle for receiving the grace or blessings
of the Buddha for a specific purpose. The process of visualization in
meditation is a method of accessing and focusing spiritual energy, like
using the lens of a magnifying glass to focus the rays of the sun in
order to kindle a fire. The image of the deity is something that is
concrete and accessible to human consciousness. In his own nature as the
Dharmakaya, the Buddha is beyond conception by the finite human mind.
The meditation deity, however, makes the unmanifest manifest and
therefore accessible to consciousness. In the same way, Christians might
have visions of angels that might make the grace of God manifest, but in
Buddhism there are both male and female meditation deities, and
Kurukulla is certainly an example of the latter. But also associated
with many sadhanas are karma-yogas or action practices aimed at
achieving more worldly goals. At the popular level, this greatly added
to the appeal of Buddhism. The psychic powers developed through sadhana
practice are known as ordinary attainments or siddhis (thun-mong gi
dngos-grub), although to us Westerners, with our historical
conditioning, psychic powers hardly seem very ordinary. But in Catholic
countries, one is quite familiar with such practices as lighting candles
while praying to the Holy Virgin or the Saints for help with worldly
matters and not just the salvation of one’s soul after death. Generally,
these karma-yogas or action practices are classified into the four
magical actions (‘phrin-las bzhi). To our Western consciousness, such
actions appear miraculous, even supernatural, but in the Buddhist view,
psychic manifestations are part of the natural order. There is nothing
supernatural about them. It is just that our modern view as to what
constitutes the nature of reality is too limited. Sadhana texts speak of
the four magical actions or magics:

1.  White magic or Shantika-karma (zhi-ba’i ‘phrin-las) has the function
    of calming and pacifying conditions and healing. White Tara is an
    example of a deity that specifically has this white function.
2.  Yellow Magic or Paushtika-karma (rgyas-pa’i phrin-las) has the
    function of increasing wealth, prosperity, abundance, merit,
    knowledge, and so on. Vasundahara and Jambhala are examples of
    deities with these functions. Hence they are yellow in color.
3.  Red Magic or Vashya-karma (dbang gi phrin-las) has the function of
    bringing people under one’s power, of enchanting, bewitching,
    attracting, subjugating, magnetizing them. This is the primary
    function of Kurukulla and hence her red color.
4.  Black Magic or Raudra-karma (drag-po’i phrin-las) has the function
    of destroying evil and obstructions to the spiritual path. This is
    the specific function of many wrathful manifestations such as the
    Dakini Simhamukha who is dark blue in color.

These four functions are allotted to the four gates of the mandala
palace, namely, the white or pacifying function in the east, the yellow
or increasing function in the south, the red or enchanting function in
the west, and the black or destroying function in the north. With each
of these four magical functions there exists an elaborate system of
correspondences. But generally, in the West, there is a prejudice
against magic, especially in Protestant Christian cultures, which makes
it difficult for people to understand the ancient Indian and the Tibetan
approach to these matters. This is compounded as well by our four
hundred years of the scientific world-view, which admits mechanistic
causality as the only possible natural cause of events. Magic
principally relates to our dimension of energy, and this energy,
according to the traditional way of thinking, is intermediate between
the mental and the physical, just as the soul is intermediate between
the spirit and the flesh. Ritual is simply one way to access and direct
energy. Although mind or spirit is primary, the other dimensions of
energy or soul and body are important. Western tradition speaks only of
two kinds of magic: white and black. The former comes from God and his
angels and the latter from the Devil and his minions. But the Buddhist
distinction between white and black is according to function and not
intention; the intention of the Buddhist practitioner in practicing
magic is always compassionate and aims at preventing evil acts, to help
others and alleviate suffering, whereas the Western understanding of
black magic involves the deliberated attempt to harm and injure.
Therefore, in Buddhist terms, the motivation in these four magical
actions is always white. Without the presence of the Bodhichitta, the
thought of compassion, no action or ritual is considered to be genuinely
Buddhist. But where we find sadhana or theurgy, that is, high magic, we
also find low magic or goetia, that is, common witchcraft. In the
Tibetan view, these practices are not necessarily black, no more
sinister than finding lucky numbers for betting on the horses, or making
love potions or amulets for protection, and so on. For these common
practices of folk magic, it is not even necessary to enter into
meditation and transform oneself into the deity. Nevertheless, Kurukulla
is also the patron of such activities. She is pre-eminently the Buddhist
Goddess of Witchcraft and Enchantment. In a real sense, she represents
the empowerment of the feminine in a patriarchal milieu. Again, one
might invoke Kurukulla to win over the heart of one’s boss for a raise,
or a client for a new sales contract, or convince the personnel
representative to hire one for a job. In general, Tibetans take a very
clear-eyed and practical view of life, without sentimentalizing
spirituality as we tend to do in the West. They do not rigidly separate
this world, with its practical concerns, from the world of the spirit.
Just as Tara in her usual green form may be called upon by Buddhists to
protect them from various dangers and threats, in particular the eight
great terrors and the sixteen fears, so in her red form as Kurukulla,
she may be called upon to exercise her powers of enchantment and
bewitchment to bring under her power (dbang du bsdud) those evil
spirits, demons, and humans who work against the welfare of humanity and
its spiritual evolution. However, in terms of practical magic, she can
bring under the practitioner’s power a personal enemy, a boss, a
politician, a policeman, or a recalcitrant lover, male or female. In
Tibet, Kurukulla was also called upon when commencing the building of a
new monastery, when undertaking a new business or enterprise, when going
into court in order to win a law case, and other such activities,
because she can subdue and subjugate the demonic and the human forces
that stand in one’s way. She, together with Manjushri and Sarasvati,
might even be called upon when a student faces a difficult examination
in school. A text like the *Arya Tara Kurukulla Kalpa* contains many
ritual practices of lower magic to accomplish specific goals, for
example:

1.  amulets for enchanting and bringing others under one’s power,
2.  spells to frighten away poisonous snakes,
3.  methods for a dissatisfied wife to subjugate her husband,
4.  amulets for protection from evil spirits and bad luck,
5.  spells for acquiring wealth and gaining power,
6.  the use of cowrie shells in divination and ritual,
7.  divinations to find a treasure,
8.  methods for walking on water,
9.  methods to avoid getting gray hair,
10. cures for frigidity and impotence.

In one Kurukulla Sadhana found in the *Sadhanamala* (No. 72), there
occurs a list of eight great siddhis or magical powers acquired through
her practice:

1.  Khadga-siddhi (ral-gri), the power to be invincible in battle with a
    sword (khadga);
2.  Anjana-siddhi (mig-rtsi), the power to remove ordinary lack of sight
    by using a magical ointment that enables the user to see Devas,
    Nagas, and other spirits;
3.  Padalepa-siddhi (rkang-pa’i byug-pa), the power to be swift of foot
    by using a magical ointment that, when applied to the feet, allows
    the user to run with incredible swiftness;
4.  Antardhana-siddhi (mi snang-bar ‘gyur-ba), the power to become
    invisible;
5.  Rasayana-siddhi (bcud-len), the power of rejuvenation and long life
    through obtaining the elixir of life by way of an alchemical
    process;
6.  Khechara-siddhi (mkha’-spyod), the power to levitate or to fly
    through the sky;
7.  Bhuchara-siddhi (zhing-spyod), the power to move freely through the
    earth, mountains, and solid walls; and
8.  Patala-siddhi (sa-‘og), the power to have command over the spirits
    of the underworld (patala).

The above were not the usual concerns of monks. And these recipies are
very reminiscent to folk magic practices, for example, in Afro-American
traditions like Voodoo, Houdou, and Santeria. Just as a practitioner of
Santeria would first invoke Allegua or Eshu before engaging in a magical
rite, here the Tibetan practitioner would invoke Kurukulla. However, the
Buddhist Goddess of Witchcraft, is not our familiar stereotype of the
witch as an old crone in a pointed hat and a wart on her hooked nose,
but she is a beautiful naked sixteen year old girl.

### The Symbolic Interpretation of Her Iconography

According to the texts, Kurukulla is sixteen years old because sixteen
is the ideal number that signifies perfection, four times four. Her face
is beautiful and her body voluptuous and alluring, as well as being red
in color, because of her magical function of enchantment and magnetism.
She has a single face because she embodies non-dual wisdom beyond
conventional distinctions of good and evil. She is naked because she is
unconditioned by discursive thoughts. She has four arms because of the
four immeasurable states of mind, namely, love, compassion, joy, and
equanimity. She holds the bow and arrow entwined with flowers because
she can give rise to thoughts of desire in the minds of others. In her
other two hands she holds the hook that attracts and summons them into
her presence and the noose by which she binds them to her will. The
ornaments of human bone she wears signify the five perfections, whereas
she herself embodies the sixth perfection, that of wisdom. She wears a
necklace of fifty freshly severed human heads dripping blood because she
vanquishes the fifty negative emotions. She is dancing because she is
active and energetic, her compassionate activity manifesting in both
Samsara and Nirvana. She dances, treading upon a male human corpse
because she enchants and subjugates the demon of ego. She stands upon a
red sun disc because her nature is hot and enflamed with passion and
upon a red lotus blossom because she is a pure vision of enlightened
awareness. In the practitioner’s meditation, such is the recollection of
the purity (dag dran) of the vision of the goddess.

### Kurukulla in the Nyingmapa Tradition

The practice of Kurukulla is found in all four Buddhist schools,
especially in rituals associated with the enchanting or subjugating
magical function. Indeed, in the Tangyur there are found a number of
sadhana texts for Kurukulla besides that composed by king Indrabhuti. In
them her name is usually not translated into Tibetan, but given in the
variant form *Ku-ru-ku-lle*. However, the chief canonical source for the
goddess, found in the Tantra section (rgyud) of the Kangyur, is the
*Arya Tara Kurukulla Kalpa* (‘Phags-ma sgrol-ma ku-ru-ku-lle’i rtog-pa),
“The Magical Rituals for the Noble Tara Kurukulla.” This text was
translated into Tibetan by Tsultrim Gyewa, a Tibetan disciple of the
great Indian master Atisha (982-1054). The latter was largely
responsible for introducing the cult of the goddess Tara into Tibet in
the 11^th^ century. In the Nyingmapa Terma tradition, she occurs in her
two or four-armed form. In the Terma cycle of Chogyur Lingpa
(1829-1870), she appears in her conventional four-armed form. In the
Terma of Apong Tulku, one of the sons of the famous 19^th^ century
Terton Dudjom Lingpa, she occurs in a two-armed form, sitting at ease,
appearing much like the more usual form of Green Tara. She holds in her
right hand a vase filled with amrita nectar and in her left hand before
her heart the stem of a lotus and on the blossom itself by her ear is a
miniature bow and arrow. In this guise she is specifically called Red
Tara (sgrol-ma dmar-mo). In the Terma cycle of Dudjom Lingpa
(1835-1904), Kurukulla represents the inner aspect of Dechen Gyalmo, the
yogini form of Yeshe Tsgyal, the consort of Guru Padmasambhava.
Moreover, it is interesting that in many Nyingmapa Terma texts,
including Chogyur Lingpa and Dudjom Lingpa, the Hindu god Mahadeva (or
Shiva) and his consort Uma are closely associated with Kurukulla as
guardian deities (srung-ma) with the magical function of enchantment.
Mahadeva and Uma are offered a red torma cake and charged to fulfill the
task of bringing others under one’s power.

### Kurukulla in the Sakyapa Tradition

But Kurukulla is also very popular among the Newer Tantric schools. In
particular, she is counted as one among “the Three Red Ones” (dmar-po
skor gsum) of the Sakyapa school and she is included among the Thirteen
Golden Dharmas, which the Sakyapas had received from India and Nepal.
These teachings are called Golden Dharmas (gser chos), not only because
they represent very precious teachings, but because in those days
(11^th^ century) Tibetan students had to pay a lot of gold for the
teachings obtained from Indian masters. Tibet was famous for its rich
gold deposits. Moreover, in the large Sakyapa collection of sadhanas
known as the *sGrub-thabs kun-btus*are found five sadhanas for Kurukulla
in the Sakyapa tradition. But for the Sakyapas, the source *par
excellence* for the practice of Kurukulla is in the *Shri Hevajra
Mahatantraraja*, according to the tradition of Lalitavajra, and coming
to them from the Mahasiddha Virupa and the Tibetan translator Drogmi
(‘Brog-mi ye-shes, 993-1050). She is known as Hevajra-krama Kurukulla
and appears in the usual four-armed form. As it says in this Tantra
(Part I, chapter 11, vv. 12-15): “Now I shall explain the sadhana for
Kurukulla by means of which all beings may be brought into subjugation.
Previously, this had been explained extensively in the twelve parts (of
the larger version of the Tantra), but here it is condensed in brief.
The Goddess originates from the syllable HRIH. She is red in color and
has four arms. Her hands hold the bow and arrow, as well as the utpala
flower (whose stem is a noose) and the iron hook. By merely meditating
upon her, one brings the three worlds under one’s power. With one
hundred thousand recitations of her mantra, one brings kings (under
one’s power), with ten thousand recitations the masses of ordinary
people of the world, with ten million recitations cattle and the Yakshas
(earth spirits), with seven hundred thousand recitations the Asuras,
with two hundred thousand recitations the Devas, and with one hundred
recitations other Mantra practitioners.” She is mentioned in two other
places in the second chapter of Part I (v. 19 and v. 26) and here her
mantra is given, together with the action mantras that may be appended
to it for specific magical purposes. Taranatha (b. 1575), in his
collection, the *Rin-byung brgya-rtsa*, gives a sample Kurukulla sadhana
from the Sakyapa tradition: “From out of the state of emptiness arise
the eight cremation grounds. In their midst, from the syllable PAM
appears a red lotus blossom. At its center, from the syllable RAM,
appears a solar disc, on which arises the red syllable HRIM, with a long
vowel mark and visarga. From this syllable emanate rays of light like
hooks and nooses, which make offerings to all the Exalted Ones, thereby
establishing all sentient beings in the state of Our Holy Lady.
Thereafter they return and are dissolved into the syllable HRIM,
whereupon I transform into Shri Kurukulla. She is red in color, with a
single face and four arms. One pair draw a bow entwined with flowers and
an utpala-tipped arrow at her ear. Her other right hand holds an iron
hook that summons and her other left hand holds the stem of an utpala
flower that forms a noose. She displays her fangs; she has three eyes
and round breasts, being like a maiden sixteen years of age. Her tawny
hair streams upward. She is adorned with five dried skulls (as her
tiara), she has a long necklace of fifty freshly severed heads. She is
adorned with ornaments of human bone and has a tiger skin across her
thighs. She stands in ardhaparyanka dance position, with her left leg
extended, upon a human corpse whose face shows to her left, amidst red
rays of light and blazing masses of fire. At her crown is the syllable
OM, at her throat is the syllable AH, and at her heart is the syllable
HUM. In the center of her heart, upon a red utpala blossom and a solar
disc, is the red syllable HRIM.”

### Other Forms of Kurukulla

As we have said, this form of red Kurukulla with four arms is also known
as Uddiyana Kurukulla or Uddiyanodbhava, the Kurukulla who comes from
Uddiyana. And again, she is known as Tarodbhava Kurukulla, she who
arises from Tara. But there exist also two-armed and eight-armed forms
of Kurukulla. The Ashtabhuja Kurukulla with eight arms appears in a
sadhana attributed to king Indrabhuti in the Tangyur and in a sadhana in
the *Sadhanamala* collection (No. 174). Her first two hands make the
gesture of Trailokyavijaya-mudra or “victory over the three worlds”,
while her other right hands hold the iron hook, an arrow, and make the
gesture of supreme generosity, varada-mudra. Her other left hands hold
the noose, the bow, and the red lotus. Her two legs are in vajrasana
position. Moreover, she is surrounded by a retinue of eight goddesses
resembling herself, but with four arms: in the east Prassana Tara, in
the south Nishpanna Tara, in the west Jaya Tara, in the north Karna
Tara, in the southeast Aparajita, in the southwest Pradipa Tara, in the
northwest Gauri Tara, and in the northeast Chunda. There is also a
two-armed white form of Kurukulla known as Shukla Kurukulla in the
*Sadhanamala* (No.185). She has a single face that is calm and beautiful
and the Buddha Amitabha adorns her crown. Her two hands hold a mala or
rosary and a bowl full of lotus flowers. Her two legs are in vajrasana
position. She adorns her body with serpents who are the great Naga
kings: Ananta is her hair ribbon, Vasuki is her necklace, Takshaka is
her ear rings, Karkotaka is her sacred thread, Padma is her girdle,
Mahapadma is her anklet, and so on. Kurukulla will also appear at times
in the retinues of other deities. Two examples are given by
Nebesky-Wojkowitz: In the mandala of the wealth god, the red Jambhala,
she appears in her usual four-armed form and in the mandala of the
four-armed Mahakala (Ye-shes mgon-po phyag-bzhi-pa) according to the
system of Shantigupta, she appears in the southwest in a red two-armed
form. She was also taken into Hinduism for her name is found among the
one thousand epithets of Mahadevi in the *Lalita-sahasra-namah*. She is
represented as a dancing beautiful maiden or kumari.
