---
author: admin
date: '2002-08-19 18:37:00'
layout: post
slug: faery-king
status: publish
title: Faery King
wordpress_id: '919'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

So, I got to play Oberon, the Faery King in a short little piece that
the Cabiri did on Saturday at a small ecological festival at Camp Long
in West Seattle. We just kind of threw the whole thing together at the
last minute but it seemed to go well. I find it amusing that when I'm in
a really goofy costume for a show, the Fish Priest costume (aka "The
Grand Salmon"), we have a horde of pictures taken. When I'm in a cool
costume and actually get compliments on it, we don't have any pictures.
Life's a bitch that way. ;-) Today is my birthday for all that got
confused. The little banner thing counts in a funny manner. I'm not
doing anything super special today. R made me a cake last night, which
was quite nice, and gave me some cool presents. The best (and most risky
for her) was a Buddhist altar cabinet (I can't remember the term). It's
basically a small freestanding cabinet with two doors on the front that
open in the middle. It's for a Thoth shrine that I've been wanting to
build. I was looking at converting an old portable bar cabinet or
somesuch but she found this online. It's very cool. So I've officially
into my fourth decade by a year (that's 31 for the challenged). Perhaps
it's time to get on the ball about what I want to do with my life? In
the meantime, I'm waiting for our infamously incompetent mail staff to
deliver the three packages that make up my new computer. I'm also
downloading the Asheron's Call 2 beta to run on it and my super-spiffy
new video card. If I change careers, I think I'm going to miss the money
but a lack of life stress would be a good thing. I'm too high strung to
do this forever.
