--- 
wordpress_id: 853
layout: post
title: Fire Class and Rituals
date: 2002-06-18 04:00:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=853
---
Sometimes I wonder if I'm really cut out to be a public performer. I'm a decent ritualist and do public rites with both my group and with others on occasion but it isn't the same as a general performance piece. R and I have been working with friends on the main ritual for the Black Sun Gathering, where we have minor parts and which combines ritual with performance. We're in a set of four roles and the other two people are fire performers and dancers (while R and I qualify as the former on good days). I watch them move and I see people with ten times the grace that I have. Now, I realize that they probably have years more experience than me and some actual dancing ability, which I lack, but it can be kind of discouraging for me. I don't really dance and never have. I've done some movement based disciplines and can get by on movement much of the time but I don't particularily feel graceful about it. I look at dance classes and it isn't clear what to take to actually get decent movement skills. I mean, do I really need to learn how to Salsa dance? ;-) I had fire class tonight and it was kind of a mixed bag. Some of the people started learning some sword work in a pre-class class tonight that kind of merged into the fire class. The sword work being taught isn't really my sort of thing at the moment. I mean, it is interesting and I wouldn't mind learning it but it isn't what I come to these classes for. I've had about 2 1/2 years of martial arts and I fenced throughout high school and early college. I can swing a pointy thing and remember some footwork. I'm sure will have some comments on why the class is being done though. I need to sign up for some classes so I'm doing more after work. I'm stuck in a quandry of how much time do I have for classes and how to split it against what I want to take. I really need to take some language classes in the longterm. I need to know how to read at least Koine Greek and probably Ancient Greek for much of my spiritual work and research. I have to be able to read that stuff in the original language. Along the same lines, I really want to learn Tibetan at some point. So much written material isn't translated which I'd like to be able to read and I dislike saying things in a spiritual context that I don't understand. On the other hand, I need to round out some of my skills. I'm very much an in the head kind of person and I should take some non-head classes such as the aforementioned dance or maybe some art related classes. I've thought of stained glass or sculpture... So many ideas and such a short lifespan and so much of the time it doesn&apos;t matter because motivation after work is a precious commodity...