---
author: admin
date: '2002-07-05 19:08:00'
layout: post
slug: medicine-buddha-practice
status: publish
title: Medicine Buddha Practice
wordpress_id: '878'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
---

Fromt
[http://www.fpmt-osel.org/meditate/medicine.htm](http://www.fpmt-osel.org/meditate/medicine.htm).
**Medicine Buddha Sadhana by Thubten Gyatso** Take Refuge and Generate
Bodhicitta (three times)

The Four Immeasurables

Cultivation of Special Bodhicitta

Seven-Limbed Prayer

Mandala Offering/Prayer of Request

Visualization [![Medicine
Buddha](http://www.fpmt-osel.org/gallery/images/tedicine.jpg)](http://www.fpmt-osel.org/gallery/medicine.htm)In
the space in front of you is the divine form of Guru Medicine Buddha. He
is seated on a lotus and moon cushion. His body is in the nature of deep
blue light, the color of lapis lazuli. He is very serene and adorned
with silk robes and magnificent jewel ornaments. Guru Medicine Buddha's
right hand rests on his right knee, palm outward in the gesture of
giving realizations. His left hand rests in his lap, holding a nectar
bowl of medicine that cures all ills, hindrances and obstacles. Above
the crown of Guru Medicine Buddha is a wish-granting jewel, the essence
of which is Guru. Above that is Buddha *Ngon.Kyen. Gyal.Po*, whose body
is red-colored, his right hand in the mudra of bestowing sublime
realizations and his left hand in the mudra of concentration. Above him
is Buddha *Cho.Drag Gya.Tso Yang*, with a yellow-colored body and hands
in the same mudra. Above him is Buddha *Nya.Ngam Mi.Cho.Pa*, light red
in color and both hands in the mudra of concentration. Above him is
Buddha *Ser.Zang Dri.Me*, pale yellow in color, his right hand in the
mudra of expounding the Dharma and his left hand in the mudra of
concentration. Above him is the Buddha *Rin.Chen Da.Wa Dang Pai.Ma
Rab.Tu Gyan.Pa Zi.Ji Dra.Yang Gyi Gyal.Po*, reddish-yellow in color and
hands in the same mudra. Above him is Buddha *Tsan.Leg Yang.Drag*,
yellow in color and hands in the same mudra. Requests to the Medicine
Buddhas (Repeat each verse seven times.) After the seventh recitation,
as you repeat "May your vow...," the Medicine Buddha to whom the request
is made absorbs into the one below, until the single divine form of
Medicine Buddha remains for the final request.)

Visualization Granting your request, from the heart and holy body of the
King of Medicine, infinite rays of light pour down completely filling
your body from head to toe. They purify all your diseases and
afflictions due to spirits and their causes, all your negative karma and
mental obscurations. In the nature of light,your body becomes clean and
clear as crystal. The light rays pour down twice more, each time filling
your body with blissful clean-clear light which you absorb. At the heart
of Medicine Buddha appears a lotus and moon disc. Standing at the center
of the moon disc, is the blue seed-syllable OM surrounded by the
syllables of the mantra. As you recite the mantra, visualize rays of
light radiating out in all directions from the syllables at his heart.
The light rays pervade the sentient beings of the six realms. Through
your great love wishing them to have happiness and, through your great
compassion wishing them to be free from all sufferings, they are
purified of all diseases, afflictions due to spirits and their causes,
all their negative karma and mental obscurations. Recitation of the
Mantra

Short Mantra

Feel Great Joy and Think

Simplified Visualization Visualize the Medicine Buddha Guru above the
crown of your head and make the following request seven times, followed
by the mantra recitation and visualization.

Mantra Recitation and Visualization for Simplified Visualization
Purifying rays of light pour down from the Guru Medicine Buddha's heart
and holy body eliminating your sicknesses and afflictions due to spirits
and their causes, all your negative karma and mental obscurations. Your
body is completely filled with light and becomes clean-clear like
crystal. Then the rays radiate out in all directions, purifying the
sicknesses and afflictions of all mother sentient beings. The Guru
Medicine Buddha melts into light and absorbs into your heart. Dedication

* * * * *

Colophon: This meditation was presented to Osel Shen Phen Ling by Ven.
Geshe Khenrab Gajam when he conferred the Medicine Buddha Tantric
Initiation in Missoula, Montana, USA in June, 1990.
