--- 
layout: post
title: My Evening
published: true
meta: 
  _edit_last: "1"
tags: 
- Daily Life
type: post
status: publish
---
Got off work this evening and headed back to Capitol Hill to meet for coffee. This has been the coffee week for friends. I met briefly for coffee last night and then Ruby Moon tonight.

Ruby Moon and I hung out for about two hours. Discussed Buddhism, traveling or studying in Nepal a bit, learning Tibetan and then autonomy, tattooing and jobs. ;-)

It's kind of refreshing to speak to someone who doesn't have the same background as me and who isn't part of the network of Occults and Pagans that I've known off and on for years. Different perspectives.

I'm still trying to think of alternative career options. Ideally, I'd like to find something with some degree of autonomy and independence. For example, if I was a lawyer (which I'm not going to do), I could set up shop on my own or join someone else's outfit. There has to be something out there which involves a set of skills that I could learn that pays a livable wage, is somewhat enjoyable, and affords some degree of independence.

If I wasn't so tired of computer related work, I'd probably knuckle down and relearn what programming I used to know and start working on learning a lot more. That fulfills some of this but I'm getting tired of sitting in front of a computer screen all day every day. It has been pointed out to me that I could be a contract tester again, if the job climate is better, and be able to regain some independence that way but I somehow doubt if that is much of a longterm solution.
