---
author: admin
date: '2002-05-13 04:56:00'
layout: post
slug: life-and-love
status: publish
title: Life and Love
wordpress_id: '818'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Well, this is the first chance that I've had to post all weekend, it has
been non-stop the whole time pretty much... Friday night, I was supposed
to have plans but they wound up getting canceled at the last minute.
Unfortunately, the D&D game with my friends had also been canceled so I
couldn't go do that either. I wound up bumming around a bit in the
evening and playing some Asheron's Call. Once she got off of work at
12:30 am, I went to meet up with R and I crashed at her place later.
Saturday, R had to go into work for a while. They're getting pretty
close to shipping. I hung out at Seattle's Best Coffee here on the Hill
and read my new imported copy of [The
Scar](http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/0333781740/) by China
Mieville, a rather good writer. Eventually, R got off of work and we did
a walk around Seward Park as a constitutional. ;-) After a nice dinner,
R and I went to the cheapo theater in West Seattle and saw "The Count of
Monte Cristo." I actually liked this version of the classic story. The
movie was only really marred by two things and that's the fact the the
!@\#! theater couldn't seem to keep power running to the projector.
**TWICE** during the course of the movie, the movie suddenly stopped and
went dark...we wound up waiting five to ten minutes each time for them
to restart the movie and neither time was in exactly the same spot as
where it had stopped. It doesn't make me want to go there again... After
the movie, R and I wound up having a fight, the first one that we've had
since we got back together. It ended well enough. We both knew that we
were tired and we could tell that it was something that wouldn't
escalate normally. The real takeaway from it is that, in some ways, I'm
pretty boring... Part of what triggered the whole debacle was R pointing
out that I rarely plan and follow through on interesting things for us
to do. Much of what we do as far as events, going out or going out of
town, is pushed for by her or planned by her, at least the details of
it. I seem content with not doing a lot much of the time. Now, I think
there are two major reasons for this: much of what I am interested in
doing is exciting only to myself and a rare number of other people (and
most of that is book/talking/computer related) and I really don't care
what I'm doing a lot of the time if I'm doing it with someone that I
want to be with and who I enjoying spending time around. It is far more
important to me that I spend time with R than what we wind up doing
together. Perhaps I'm weird that way... I've never been much of a party
or club goer overall. I certainly don't mind such things but I don't do
them by myself so I wind up doing them when the people that I am with
want to do them more than any other time... Most of my friends rarely
throw parties. I'm not a heavy drinker at all and most of my in person
interaction with friends in the last year or two is either in ritual, in
fire-related activities, or over coffee as we chat about things... It
seems that this isn't exciting and doesn't lead to my planning of
interesting weekends. I'm going to endeavor to be a bit more outgoing
with R but my mind doesn't always think that way. Sunday, R and I went
out to breakfast and then the Fremont Sunday Market. We ran into , who I
was looking for there, since she sells her jewelry there often. Shes'
the individual that started teaching me staff spinning for the fire
shows a few months ago and I'm glad that we saw her. After that, we
picked up my daughter Madeline, went kit flying at Gasworks, to Red
Robin for Dinner and then R and I finished off by watching "Twelve
Monkeys." Isn't that a lot of detail? In any case, it's a full weekend
because we have to pack it in. I won't see R during the day or evening
again for more than 30 minutes until next weekend probably with her
evening and night work schedule. We grab the 30 minute coffee at my
cafeteria before her work in the afternoon or spend the night together
after her work post-midnight but our only solid time together is
weekends....
