---
author: admin
date: '2002-07-05 18:09:00'
layout: post
slug: the-fouth
status: publish
title: The Fouth
wordpress_id: '877'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

R and I went and grabbed for the Woodinville fireworks display last
night. My friend, J, trapecia's old man, was on the pyrotechnics crew so
it seemed a good place to be. After wading through the bovine hordes and
getting coffee along the way, we were treated to a fairly good fireworks
show. It's been a long time since I saw a show in person and up close
and it was fun. R and I rented some movies to watch since we had the day
off and I have a four day weekend. We watched "The Duel" aka [Jue zhan
zi jing cheng zhi dian](http://us.imdb.com/Title?0243876) first. Hong
Kong Sword and Sorcery kind of thing about a duel between two swordsmen,
one nicknamed the "God of the Sword" and the other one the "Saint of the
Sword" over the apex of the Imperial Palace in the Forbidden City. Of
course, my favorite character in it (and R's too, I think) is Nick
Cheung's "Secret Agent Dragon 9," who is a bit of a James Bond secret
agent for the Imperial government. He gets all of the ribald lines,
slapping the asses of women he's fighting and generally being a rogue.
He's got cool shades and a glider kite and the Buddha Push with his two
fingers. The two swordsmen are in a league of their own by Dragon 9 is
the comic relief of the cast as well as kicking some ass. One notable
thing, and I've seen this in a couple of recent Hong Kong flicks, is
that Hong Kong finally seems to have acquired the ability to do fairly
modern special effects. When the God of the Sword makes his standard
showy entrance (to Dragon 9's commentary every time), he's circled by
ghostly flicking dragons in the sky in a rather cool manner. I love Hong
Kong fantasy movies and the advantage of non-cheezy effects is cool. Go
rent it. Today I need to start packing boxes for R and mine's impending
move. We move after we get back from vacation and we leave for that next
Thursday morning so... I think I'll swing by the University and try to
track down some of the scholastic articles referenced in the latest book
on Iamblichus that I posted about recently as well. Tomorrow is the
Medicine Buddha empowerment and a tux fitting for my friend Terry's
wedding.
