---
author: admin
date: '2002-04-03 23:36:00'
layout: post
slug: mathematical-magick
status: publish
title: Mathematical Magick
wordpress_id: '774'
categories:
- Academic
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

**Some Random Thoughts about the Occult Correspondences of the Platonic
Solids and Their Symmetries** By Anders Sandberg Very little of modern
mathematics has been used in the Cabala, which relies mainly on simple
arithmetic operations and some basic combinatorics (an area which it in
fact partially founded). I think this is regrettable, since there is a
plethora of interesting mathematical results which could be applied to
occultism. In the following I will discuss a few interesting areas of
solid geometry and abstract algebra. The discussion will be rather
non-mathematical, and I will not attempt stringency, which anyway is a
bit hard to apply when discussing occult matters. It is helpful to have
models or good renditions of the various polyhedra available to
visualise the various properties I will discuss below (like [RW] or
[C]), since I cannot include pictures of the often quite complex
structures. **The Five Platonic Solids** The Platonic solids, also known
as the regular polyhedrons, are the three-dimensional bodies whose
surfaces consist of identical, regular polygons which meet in equal
angles at the corners. There are five such polyhedrons, the Tetrahedron,
the Octahedron, the Cube, the Icosahedron and the Dodecahedron. The
first three have apparently been known since ancient times. The others
was definitely known by the Pythagoreans, since one of them, Timaeus of
Locri, invented the "Platonic" correspondence between them and the
elements. Plato later publicised their results, which is the reason they
bear his name. Here is a table with their properties (based on [C]):

    Faces  Edges   Vertices    Schäfli Dual        Plato
    symbol

    Tetrahedron 4   6   4       {3,3}   Tetrahedron     Fire
    Octahedron  8   12  6       {3,4}   Cube        Air
    Cube        6   12  8       {4,3}   Octahedron  Earth
    Icosahedron 20  30  12      {3,5}   Dodecahedron    Spirit
    Dodecahedron    12  30  20      {5,3}   Icosahedron Water

[ The Schäfli symbol represents the type of polygons making up the faces
and the number which meet at each vertex. A cube consists of squares (4)
and three squares meet at each corner (3), thus its symbol is {4,3} ] [
Two polyhedra are duals if the vertices of one correspond one-to-one to
the centres of the faces of the other. ] The Platonic Correspondences
are Tetrahedron: Fire, Icosahedron: Water, Octahedron: Air, Cube: Earth
and Dodecahedron: The Quinta Essentia. While this is pleasing from a
traditional and aesthetic standpoint, I have not found it workable from
a more mathemagickal standpoint. These solids naturally fall into three
groups, based on their symmetries and duals. The Octahedron and Cube,
which are duals of each other, form one group, while the Dodecahedron
and Icosahedron form another. The Tetrahedron form a third group with
only itself as a member since it is its own dual. Note that the five
elements are similarly divided: the spiritual elements are duals to the
material elements (and a similar duality holds for actives and
passives), and the fifth is left out or its own opposite (one is
reminded of the concept of positive and negative aethyr in [CL]). Thus,
from my mathemagickal standpoint, Quintessence belongs more naturally to
the Tetrahedron, the Cube and Octahedron corresponds as normal to Earth
and Air while Fire and Water correspond to the Dodecahedron and
Icosahedron respectively. I will now discuss the properties of the
various polyhedrons from different perspectives. **The Tetrahedron** The
Tetrahedron classically represents Fire, and each face is also the
alchemical triangle of fire. The Golden Dawn called it the Pyramid of
Fire, and used it as the admission badge for the path of Shin. The three
upper triangles represents Solar Fire, Volcanic Fire and Astral Fire,
while the bottom triangle, often hidden from view is the latent heat.
The upper triangles are also linked to the three fire-signs Aries,
Saggittaurius and Leo. Note that each face and each vertex can be put
into a one-to-one correspondence with an element. Each element touches
the others, showing that the superficial divisions of Fire and Water,
Air and Earth are really unities. No element is superior to any other,
and they all balance each other into a very stable structure
(Buckminster Fuller designed his entire mathematics and architecture on
this simple fact). This represents is in my view the state before the
divisions between the elements, and thus resonant with the Quinta
Essentia, from which the element were formed. Its worth noting that the
tetrahedron is its own dual. At the same time it belongs to the 4.3.2
symmetry group, the same as the octahedron and the cube belongs to. In a
way this reflects "Keter is in Malkuth, and Malkuth is in Keter", the
material world subtly reflects the spiritual world and vice versa. The
four elements are linked with six edges, which may correspond to the
hexagrams and the planets (the Sun is as usual in the centre). Seeing
things this way, each planet can be seen as a path between two elements.
Some possible correspondences (this probably requires more thought, and
I would be happy to hear other possibilities):

    Moon       Water-Fire
    Mercury     Air-Fire
    Venus       Water-Earth
    Mars        Fire-Earth
    Jupiter     Air-Water
    Saturn      Earth-Air

We will see that this planetary/double-element correspondence is common
in the other structures too, making it very interesting. **The
Octahedron** The Octahedron corresponds classically to Air. It has 8
faces (corresponding to Hod and mental activity?), 6 vertices and 12
edges. The edges naturally correspond to the zodiac. They can be
arranged in such a manner that the four triplicities border a triangular
face each without overlap. These faces cover half the surface, leaving 4
incomplete faces with signs from three elements along each edge (this
may signify an absence of the left-out element. The octahedron thus
consists of both the abundance of each element and its absence). At each
corner two elements meet (creating the same planetary correspondences as
in the tetrahedron, with the sun at the centre as usual). In this
arrangement, each square "equator" corresponds to one quadruplicity.
Another common use of the octahedral symmetry is used in banishing
rituals (mainly the LBRP and the Rose-Cross Rite). The sphere encircled
by three orthogonal circles is the natural projection of the octahedron
onto the surface of a sphere. In most rituals the horizontal equator
corresponds to the cherubic signs. This also corresponds to the six
directions of the Yetziratic Sealing Rite [DK], see below for the
discussion of the symmetric group. The octahedron fits air very well,
since the various symmetries and correspondences are so clear and easily
viewed. As we will see in the case of the cube, many of these symmetries
are hidden or hard to discern in the case of Earth, perhaps signifying
that the intellect allows us to see the structure of the world more
easily than our physical senses, which are parts of the system we try to
study. **The Cube** The Cube naturally corresponds to Earth. It is
stable, the basis of western architecture and salt crystallises into
cubes. It has six faces, making some groups attribute it to Tiphareth.
The six faces naturally fit the sephira, and can of course be linked to
the planets except for the sun, which is placed in the centre. Another
natural link is the folded out cube, which forms a cross. The eight
corners of the cube neatly corresponds to three complementary dualities.
When two dualities interact, the four elements are created. Now the four
elements are dualized again, and we get eight corners representing the
relative absence and abundance the each element. This is naturally dual
to the faces of the octahedron. In the same way the six faces correspond
to the six vertices of the octahedron (i.e. meetings between two
quadruplicities). It is however not possible to arrange the three
quadruplicities along the edges to enclose whole faces without overlaps.
Does this signify the imperfections and limitations of the material
world? Its an interesting fact that the cube isn't stable. If a model is
made using toothpicks and peas, it can easily be shown that it tends to
distort or collapse. It is however possible to inscribe a tetrahedron
inside a cube so that its vertices meet four corners of the cube and its
edges lie in the faces of the cube. This will stabilise it completely
(spirit stabilises and orders matter). If two tetrahedrons are inscribed
using different sets of vertices, they intersect and form a geometric
body known as the "Stella Octangula" (which is an octahedron with
pyramids added on its faces). This is a very neat representation of the
complementarity between positive and negative forces, which seems to
underlie much of the structure of the cube. It is worth noting that the
duality of the cube and octahedron fits the duality between Air and
Earth. Both belong to the same symmetry family (called 4.3.2), to which
all normal minerals and crystals belong (only the so-called
quasicrystals belong to the icosahedral symmetry family). It is also an
interesting fact that of the platonic polyhedrons, only the cube can
fill space completely, without interstices or overlaps. Thus we see that
despite that the only way to create a completely consistent universe out
of one element is to use matter. The other elements are not able to bind
together in the right way to form a stable world, but will either move
around or form imperfect patterns. **The Icosahedron** This polyhedron
traditionally corresponds to water, possibly because it rolls quite
easily. Its 20 faces could correspond to the sephiroth and qlippoth, but
I have so far not found any significant arrangement. While the
octahedron and cube, belonging to 4.3.2 have many symmetries involving
the four elements, trinities and dualities, the icosahedron and
doedecahedron, belonging to 5.3.2 have links to the five elements and
the trinities and dualities. Thus they correspond closer to the whole
system than the more material elements, which deal with just the four
elements. In nature these symmetries are rare, and are usually found in
viruses and radiolaria. One reason for the rarity of these symmetries
may be that they don't interconnect as well as the 4.3.2 group. In
crystals, molecules and viruses with 5.3.2 symmetries organize according
to the 4.3.2 group instead, subjugating their own symmetries. The higher
elements decay into the lower in order to form the world. These
symmetries are harder to discern, since traditionally we humans have a
tendency to avoid high-order groups, especially odd symmetries (its
worth noting that the number five is sacred to the Discordians since it
is the smallest number of factors the human mind is unable to handle at
once). The 12 vertices can of course be viewed as the zodiac. In this
case each sign is linked to five other signs along the edges which
corresponds to the five elements, a quite interesting set of
corresponences (this is of course reflected in the faces and edges of
the dodecahedron in a similar way). This seems to imply a network
between the signs, where each sign is transformed into five others by
the actions of the five elements. I have so far not seen any uses for
this system, but it is potentially interesting. One obvious way of
arranging the elements in such a pattern is the following: choose two
edges opposite to each other and assign them to an element. Then there
are four edges along the "equator" if the two edges are regarded as the
poles which can be assigned the same element. These edges are orthogonal
to the first, and each pair of opposite edges are orthogonal to all
others. In fact, if the opposite edges are joined with lines through the
interior, a very neat structure of interlocking rectangles result, where
each rectangle locks the other rectangles without touching them. Each
pair of rectangles doesn't interlock, but together they form a
synergetic whole. In this way each element can be assigned to its own
edges in a proper way. It is interesting to note that the pattern inside
each element belongs to the 4.3.2 symmetry group. The icosahedron can be
inscribed in the octahedron if its vertices are placed on the
octahedron-edges in the golden ratio. In this case eight faces of the
icosahedron lie in the plane of the faces of the octahedron, and the
rest lie in the interior. As a general rule, the golden ratio is
intimately linked to the 5.3.2 family of solids. This construction is
symbolic of how the creativity and feeling of Water is needed to form
the rational thought of Air. In my own system the icosahedron
corresponds to water. It seems to tie together things in complex,
apparently random ways and encompass them without necessarily elucidate
their interrelationships. As one can see, the complexity of the
icosahedron and dodecahedron "liquiefies" the various correspondences.
The number of possible arrangement is much larger than for the
relatively simple cubes and octahedrons. **The Dodecahedron** This solid
is classically attributed to spirit, probably because it was the last
discovered and because of the pentagonal faces. Its twelve faces has
naturally been attributed to the zodiac, and there have even been
dodecahedral calendars. The symmetries discussed above exist in a dual
form here too. The dodecahedron can be seen as the union of five
intersecting cubes, whose corners touch the vertices of the dodecahedron
(this is a rather complex structure and hard to visualize). At each
vertex three different cubes meet. Along each side of the dodecahedron
an edge from a cube runs, creating a rather neat system of
correspondences between the five elements and the edges like the system
mentioned above for the icosahedron. Another way of placing polyhedrons
in the dodecahedron is to use five intersecting tetrahedrons, whose
corners touch the vertices. This is a most elegant configuration where
the tetrahedrons seem to twist around each other. It exists in two
different forms, essentially corresponding to clockwise and
counterclockwise rotation. The space occupied by all five tetrahedons is
a smaller icosahedron, another nice example of the power of duals. It
could perhaps be seen as a "construction drawing" of Fire, where the
Quinta Essentia takes on its various elemental properties, and combines
them in an eternally rotating and twisting form. The evolution of the
Quinta Essentia into the four elements may thus be described as follows:
The original form of the Tetrahedron is created out of the primordial
chaos by being the simplest and most stable form. It combines in various
ways with itself, either by moving and mixing, forming the Dodecahedron
and Fire, or by linking together and building the Icosahedron and
primordial Water. However, while both polyhedrons are close to being
perfect spheres, they don't fit together. These imperfect interactions
betwen the growing numbers of polyhedrons force them to order themselves
according to cubical symmetries, and Earth and Air are formed. As we
will see, this fits with some results within group theory. Before we
shift our focus to the abstract properties of groups, its worth
mentioning that there exist other polyhedrons of potential magickal
interest. **Other Polyhedra** One such set is the Kepler-Poinsot
polyhedra, also known as star polyhedra. They are a generalisation of
the platonic solids, where faces no longer have to be normal polygons
but can be star-polygons (like pentagrams) instead, and they may
intersect. The four star polyhedrons are called the small stellated
dodechahedron, the great stellated dodechahedron, the great dodecahedron
and the great icosahedron. They all belong to the same symetry group as
the dodecahedron and icosahedron. These fascinating polyhedrons can be
seen to correspond to the four elements. The small stellated
dodecahedron has pentagrams as faces. The great dodecahedron, its dual,
has intersecting pentagonal faces. The great stellated dodecahedron has
also pentagram faces and its dual, the great icosahedron has triangular
faces. I would say the great icosahedron corresponds to Fire (its faces
are triangles, and it opens almost like an erupting flower). Its dual,
the great stellated dodecahedron correspond to Water. The small
stellated dodecahedron, with its pentagonal pyramids rising from the
pentagrammal faces correspond to Air, and the almost asteroidlike (it
looks a bit like a sphere with dents) great dodecahedron as Earth. Like
I mentioned above, the {5.3.2} group seems to exist on a higher level
(Perhaps in Briah if the {4.3.2} group exists in Yetzira), containing
the symbolism and patterns of the other group in abstract form. Beside
these polyhedrons, there are the Archimedian polyhedrons. These are
polyhedrons where the faces can be different regular polygons (no
intersections or star-faces allowed). There are 14 of these, with no
known occult connotations. This is an area where much further discovery
is possible. **The Magick of Groups** Groups are among the most useful
mathematical concepts, and can be readily applied to magick (what cannot
be applied?). A Group is a set with an associated binary operation \* on
the set, with the following three axioms:

1.  There is an element e in the set such that e\*x=x\*e=x for all x.
2.  The operation \* is associative (a\*b)\*c=a\*(b\*c).
3.  There exists an element x' for every x in the group, such that
    x'\*x=x\*x'=e.

Note that these three axioms fit quite well with the three supernal
sepiroth. However, the \* operation seldom seems to have any obvious
occult interpretation. The simplest group (except the unit group with
just a unit element) is the cyclic 2-group Z2. It has two elements which
correspond to the two sides of a duality. The next simplest is of course
the cyclic 3-group with three elements, corresponding to a trinity. The
most important group in algebraic magick is of course the group of the
four elements. However, there are two groups with four elements, the
cyclic group Z4 and the Klein 4-group. The respective multiplication
tables are:

    Z4                 Klein
    e   a   b   c       e   a   b   c

    e   e   a   b   c       e   a   b   c
    a   a   b   c   e       a   e   c   b
    b   b   c   e   a       b   c   e   a
    c   c   e   a   b       c   b   a   e

I use e= Earth, a=Air, b=Water c=Fire. To which group does the four
element belong? This depends a bit on your perspective on the elements.
If one sees them as a cyclic organisation, where each element is
succeeded by the next, Z4 is a natural choice. However, if one carefully
studies the Klein group, one sees that it consists of two parts. The
material elements form a sub-group, where the interactions between Air
and Earth form only themselves. When the astral elements are added, the
interactions between themselves also form the material elements (the
descent from the astral to the material plane). However, when they
interact with matter, it can be elevated to the astral level. The group
is also the cartesian product of two 2-groups, which fits in well with
the division between actives/passives and astrals/materials. This is the
reason I think the group fits best for the elements. If the elements
correspond to the Klein 4-group, what does the cyclic group correspond
to? If one studies the quadruplicities in the literature, one quickly
find that practically all sets of four symbols correspond to the four
elements. However, there seems to be one important quadruplicity which
fits the cyclic group, the INRI formula. It denotes a linear
progression, but at the same time the first and last step are the same.
In terms of group theory and the Golden Dawn system, one could say that
the first Yud represents the stable, unenlightened state. Nun, death and
destruction, forces a change which leads to Resh, rebirth and light
which becomes the second Yud, representing the relatively enlightened
state where the process can begin anew ("Every day is an initiation").
Multiplication table:

    I1 N   R   I2

    I1  I1  N   R   I2
    N   N   R   I2  I1
    R   R   I2  I1  N
    I2  I2  I1  N   R

[I1 and I2 represents the first and second yud, respectively] Its worth
noting that the orbit of Nun (the elements x, x\^2,x\^3...) generates
the whole group, it goes forward all the time. The orbit of the first
Yud is simply itself, the unenlightened state cannot change without any
external stimuli. Resh, the sun, has an orbit spanning itself and the
first yud. Light in itself can only become no light or more light, not
something else. However, the second yud has an orbit which moves
backwards along the sequence, ending up at the first yud and then
continuing around to itself. The enlightened are able to move as they
want, and have no fear of light, death or being unenlightened. If we
look at the orbits of the Klein group in the same way, we find that each
element has an orbit consisting of itself and the unity element earth; a
pure element can become material, but not create anything else. A
mixture of element is necessary to create the whole universe.However, it
is necessary only to start with two elements to create it; fire and
water can produce earth and air (but not vice versa). There are just one
group of order five, the cyclic 5-group Z5 since the only groups of
prime orders are cyclic (this follows from the very useful theorem of
Lagrange which states that the orders of subgroups must divide the order
of the group). It is interesting to see that the elements in themselves
might form a non-cyclic group, but when Spirit is added, the result is
cyclic. Fire emanates from spirit, and is then in turn transformed
through Water, Air and Earth until it returns to its source. The orbits
of the Z5 group naturally lead to the theory of lineal figures
(pentagrams, hexagrams etc.). A cyclic group can be generated by an
element in different ways, depending on its size. Z5 can be generated in
essentially two ways: by going through each of its elements in turn
(1234512345123...) or by going through every two elements
(135241352413...). This corresponds to the pentagon and pentagram
respectively. It can be shown that for a cyclic group of order n, every
choice of a "step length" k which is relatively prime to n creates a
lineal figure (other choices doesn't generate the whole group). For
example, the cyclic group of order 7 can be generated by steps of length
1 (the heptagon), 2 (the "even heptagram)" and 3 (the "spiky
heptagram"). The other choices will just create these three figures. For
the cyclic group of order 8 there are just the octagon and octagram
(stepsize 3 or 5), the steps of size 2,4 and 6 produces just two nested
squares. For further correspondences of these figures, see the paper on
lineal figures in [IR]. The most important group of order six is the
permutation group of three elements (also known as the symmetric group
of three letters), S3. It consists of the six possible permutations of
three letters. These permutations are mentioned in the Sepher Yetzirah
(which in fact is a precursor to the study of permutation groups), where
the 6 permutations of the three different letters Yud, Heh and Vau of
the Name were used to create the directions (this is also used in the
Yetziratic Sealing Rite). These permutations fit with the corners of an
octahedron or the faces of a cube. Such symmetric groups are very
important, since it can be shown (Cayley's Theorem) that all groups are
isomorphic to a group of permutations (which are subgroups of the
symmetric groups). This means that if we have a group (say the group of
elements), we can interpret each elements as an operation on a word. For
example, if we look at the permutations of a four-letter word, the
sub-group of permutations generated by the interchange of the first two
or the last two letters is isomorphic to the klein group corresponding
to the elements (the elements correspond to the identity,(12),(34) and
(12)(34) in cycle-notation). From an occult standpoint this is of course
a natural interpretation of temura, which essentially deals with
operations on different entities through the mediation of
letter-permuations, not unlike how physicists study physical objects by
studying the equations describing them. This introduces an interesting
question in the Cabala, what other permutation-subgroups of the
tetragrammaton have magickal correspondences? There are 24 elements in
the group. This makes it possible to have subgrups of order 2,3,4,6,8
and 12. The subgrups of order 2,3 and 4 have already been discussed.The
sub-group of order 12 is known as the alternating group, and consists of
all the even permutations of the tetragrammaton. Its interesting to note
that 12 permutations of the tetragrammaton are used linked to the zodiac
and 12 tribes of Israel [1], but they are unfortunately not purely the
even permutations. The zodiac quite obviously corresponds to the
cartesian product of a trinity (the alchemical elements) and the four
elements (the klein group, which is Z2 \* Z2). The result is Z3 \* V =
Z12, a quite neat cyclic group wich fits well with the cyclical nature
of the zodiac. Various elements generate the whole group or subgroups
(like the quadruplicities and trinities). However, this essay would
become far too long if I elaborated on the interesting details of this
(and more complex groups). Instead I encourage the reader to study and
contemplate the meanings of the various mathematical concepts I have
described, and find new structures. Mathematics is filled with
fascinating objects, and their subtle interrelations and symbolism is an
source of endless beauty. **References:** [CL] Colin Low, Some Notes on
the Quabalah [C] H.S.M. Coxeter, Regular Polytopes [DK] Donald Kraig,
Modern Magic [F] John B. Fraleigh, Abstract Algebra [IR] Israel
Regardie, The Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic [RW] Robert Williams,
The Geometrical Foundation of Natural Structure
