---
author: admin
date: '2002-05-01 04:27:00'
layout: post
slug: evenings
status: publish
title: Evenings
wordpress_id: '806'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Well, I met with Ruby Moon this evening over at the Barca. I'm starting
to really like that place. It's got a good atmosphere and decent drinks
without being packed to the gills at all times. I had a couple of vodka
tonics and probably blathered more than I should have. I shouldn't tease
Ruby Moon as much as I probably did, even if I was doing it in fun. She
teased me back but I was probably more on the obnoxious side too. Some
days just bring it out of me and this has been one of them overall. I'm
worried about a good friend of mine and feel kind of odd otherwise. Not
bad, just odd... I did some work over the last two days on the site for
**Origins II** that the [Anunnaki Project](http://www.anunnaki.org) is
hosting at the end of May. [Check it
out.](http://www.anunnaki.org/origins/) The Anunnaki Project is the
parent non-profit organization that runs the
[Cabiri](http://www.cabiri.org). Reading about the Anunnaki Project
goals and seeing the Cabiri perform are what convinced me to get
involved with the group. It doesn't hurt that I'm the webmaster now and
re-did the Anunnaki Project site from scratch. If any of you are
interested in this sort of thing, please take a look. There will be
presentations, performances, music and beer over the course of four
hours at the end of May.
