---
author: admin
date: '2002-11-11 06:08:00'
layout: post
slug: seven-sermons-to-the-dead-sermo-i
status: publish
title: Seven Sermons to the Dead, Sermo I
wordpress_id: '1017'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

As many of you may be aware, Carl Jung "discovered" a series of Gnostic
texts, the **Seven Sermons to the Dead** or ***Septem Sermones ad
Mortuos***. I recently found them online and I felt that I might
reproduce them here as they are interesting and I hadn't read them
before. **Sermo I** The Dead came back from Jerusalem, where they found
not what they sought. They prayed me let them in and besought my word,
and thus I began my teaching. Harken: I begin with nothingness.
Nothingness is the same as fullness. In infinity full is no better than
empty. Nothingness is both empty and full. As well might ye say anything
else of nothingness, as for instance, white is it, or black, or again,
it is not, or it is. A thing that is infinite and eternal hath no
qualities, since it hath all qualities. This nothingness or fullness we
name the PLEROMA. Therein both thinking and being cease, since the
eternal and infinite possess no qualities. In it no being is, for he
then would be distinct from the pleroma, and would possess qualities
which would distinguish him as something distinct from the pleroma. In
the pleroma there is nothing and everything. It is quite fruitless to
think about the pleroma, for this would mean self-dissolution. CREATURA
is not in the pleroma, but in itself. The pleroma is both beginning and
end of the created beings. It pervadeth them, as the light of the sun
everywhere pervadeth the air. Although the pleroma pervadeth altogether,
yet hath created being no share thereof, just as a wholly transparent
body becometh neither light nor dark through the light which pervadeth
it. We are, however, the pleroma itself, for we are a part of the
eternal and the infinite. But we have no share thereof, as we are from
the pleroma infinitely removed; not spiritually or temporally, but
essentially, since we are distinguished from the pleroma in our essence
as creatura, which is confined within time and space. Yet because we are
parts of the pleroma, the pleroma is also in us. Even in the smallest
point is the pleroma endless, eternal, and entire, since small and great
are qualities which are contained in it. It is that nothingness which is
everywhere whole and continuous. Only figuratively, therefore, do I
speak of created being as part of the pleroma. Because, actually, the
pleroma is nowhere divided, since it is nothingness. We are also the
whole pleroma, because, figuratively, the pleroma is the smallest point
(assumed only, not existing) in us and the boundless firmanent about us.
But wherefore, then, do we speak of the pleroma at all, since it is thus
everything and nothing? I speak of it to make a beginning somewhere, and
also to free you from the delusion that somewhere, either without or
within, there standeth something fixed, or in some way established, from
the beginning. Every so-called fixed and certain thing is only relative.
That alone is fixed and certain which is subject to change. What is
changeable, however, is creatura. Therefore is it the one thing which is
fixed and certain; because it hath qualities: it is even quality itself.
The question ariseth: How did creatura originate? Created beings came to
pass, not creatura: since created being is the very quality of the
pleroma, as much as non-creation which is the eternal death. In all
times and places is creation, in all times and places is death. The
pleroma hath all, distinctiveness and non-distinctiveness.
Distinctiveness is creatura. It is distinct. Distinctivness is its
essence, and therefore it distinguisheth. Wherefore also he
distinguished qualities of the pleroma which are not. He distinguisheth
them out of his own nature. Therefore he must speak of qualities of the
pleroma which are not. What use, say ye, to speak of it? Saidst thou not
thyself, there is no profit in thinking upon the pleroma? That said I
unto you, to free you from the delusion that we are able to think about
the pleroma. When we distinguish qualities of the pleroma, we are
speaking from the ground of our own distinctiveness and concerning our
own distinctiveness. But we have said nothing concerning the pleroma.
Concerning our own distinctiveness, however, it is needful to speak,
whereby we may distinguish ourselves enough. Our very nature is
distinctiveness. If we are not true to this nature we do not distinguish
ourselves enough. Therefore must we make distinctions of qualities. What
is the harm, ye ask, in not distinguishing oneself? If we do not
distinguish, we get beyond our own nature, away from creatura. We fall
into indistinctiveness, which is the other quality of the pleroma. We
fall into the pleroma itself and cease to be creatures. We are given
over to dissolution in nothingness. This is the death of the creature.
Therefore we die in such measure as we do not distinguish. Hence the
natural striving of the creature goeth towards distinctiveness, fighteth
against primeval, perilous sameness. This is called the PRINCIPIUM
INDIVIDUATIONIS. This principle is the essence of the creature. From
this you can see why indistictiveness and non-distinction are a great
danger for the creature. We must, therefore, distinguish the qualities
of the pleroma. The qualities are PAIRS OF OPPOSITES, such as — The
Effective and the ineffective. Fullness and Emptiness. Living and Dead.
Difference and Sameness. Light and Darkness. The Hot and the Cold. Force
and Matter. Time and Space. Good and Evil. Beauty and Ugliness. The One
and the Many. The pairs of opposites are qualities of the pleroma which
are not, because each balanceth each. As we are the pleroma itself, we
also have all these qualities in us. Because the very ground of our
nature is distinctiveness, which meaneth — 1. These qualities are
distinct and separate in us one from the other; therefore they are not
balanced and void, but are effective. Thus are we the victims of the
pairs of opposites. The pleroma is rent in us. 2. The qualities belong
to the pleroma, and only in the name and sign of distinctiveness can and
must we possess and live them. We must distinguish ourselves from
qualities. In the pleroma they are balanced and void; in us not. Being
distinguished from them delivereth us. When we strive after the good or
the beautiful, we thereby forget our own nature, which is
disinctiveness, and we are delivered over to the qualities of the
pleroma, which are pairs of opposites. We labor to attain the good and
the beautiful, yet at the same time we also lay hold of the evil and the
ugly, since in the pleroma these are one with the good and the
beautiful. When, however, we remain true to our own nature, which is
distinctiveness, we distinguish ourselves from the good and the
beautiful, therefore, at the same time, from the evil and ugly. And thus
we fall not into the pleroma, namely, into nothingness and dissolution.
Thou sayest, ye object, that difference and sameness are also qualities
of the pleroma. How would it be, then, if we strive after difference?
Are we, in so doing, not true to our own nature? And must we none the
less be given over to the sameness when we strive after difference? Ye
must not forget that the pleroma hath no qualities. We create them
through thinking. If, therefore, ye strive after difference or sameness,
or any qualities whatsoever, ye pursue thoughts which flow to you out of
the pleroma: thoughts, namely, concerning non-existing qualities of the
pleroma. Inasmuch as ye run after these thoughts, ye fall again into the
pleroma, and reach difference and sameness at the same time. Not your
thinking, but your being, is distinctiveness. Therefore not after
difference, ye think it, must ye strive; but after YOUR OWN BEING. At
bottom, therefore, there is only one striving, namely, the striving
after your own being. If ye had this striving ye would not need to know
anything about the pleroma and its qualities, and yet would ye come to
your right goal by virtue of your own being. Since, however, thought
estrangeth from being, that knowledge must I teach you wherewith ye may
be able to hold your thought in leash.
