---
author: admin
date: '2002-10-09 14:12:00'
layout: post
slug: legacies
status: publish
title: Legacies
wordpress_id: '972'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---
The Hellenic peoples left us a legacy. It is a legacy of pain and suffering and it called "the Greek language."

That's my comment after a class on accents in Attic Greek. Everyone here who knows the difference between an acute accent, a grave and a circumflex raise their hand? ... <strong><em>I thought so</em></strong>...

I'm actually enjoying the class quite a bit and I made extensive notes (a couple of pages) last night on this stuff but the teacher was pretty clear that we'll learn it mostly by use.

I found myself wishing for one of the new Tablet PCs from work because I could take all of my notes in longhand, as I do in my paper notebook, but then store them someplace and manipulate them. I should be getting one for my work soon since I'm an evil manager of people. Geek envy will be mine.

My current desire is to get photocopies (or old copies) of a number of the Hermetic and magical works in Greek that I want to learn to read. I want to push myself over the next nine months to learn to use them as practice guides for reading Greek because reading them is one of the main reasons that I'm taking the classes. I'm also trying to make contingency plans on what to do if we don't get a full year of this class. It has 12 people in it (the max) but I know if enrollment falls in following terms, it may not be offered. The teacher will teach one on one but wants $40 for it (!!) which isn't something that I'd want to do.

R and I watched the <a href="http://us.imdb.com/Title?0237534">Brotherhood of the Wolf</a> last night, which I hadn't seen when it came out earlier this year. I liked it quite a bit. I heard a lot of bitching at the time about the "unrealistic" action and such but, truth be told, it was lower key than a lot of the action cheese in your typical Hong Kong action movie and entertaining in its own right. It was nice to see something that was both French and bad-ass because the gods know that the frogs don't have a reputation for it anymore. <strong>;-)</strong>

We watched <a href="http://us.imdb.com/Title?0105859">Dragon Inn</a> the other day as well. I must say that I was completely underwhelmed by this movie. It was cheezy in all of the wrong ways and unintentionally funny near the end. R and I just about died laughing during the final showdown fight scenes. Bleh.

R is working days this week so we've actually been able to spend some time together after work, which is almost unheard of. Since I have my Greek class, it isn't without constraints but it is nice to get to eat dinner together and to hang out.
