---
author: admin
date: '2002-09-24 19:48:00'
layout: post
slug: open-source-golden-dawn
status: publish
title: Open Source Golden Dawn
wordpress_id: '962'
categories:
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

An ex-girlfriend of mine forwarded this url to me today. She's a member
of the Open Source Golden Dawn group down in the San Francisco Bay Area.
This was started by my friend [Sam
Webster](http://www.hermetic.com/webster/) about a year and a half or so
ago. He and the group seem to be doing a lot of good things.
[http://tahuti.osogd.org/osogd.org/index.html](http://tahuti.osogd.org/osogd.org/index.html).

### The Manifesto of the Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn

Issued 23 September 2002 CE *"Abrogate are all rituals, all ordeals, all
words and signs. Ra-Hoor-Khuit hath taken his seat in the East at the
Equinox of the Gods."* As Western Civilization enters a new Aeon, so
must its esoteric traditions. Our solution is not to destroy the old
traditions, but to make them new again. Our Order is a manifestation and
heir of the Golden Dawn current -- that is, an autonomous entity, but
one that draws upon the knowledge, experience, practices and spirit of
the system of magical training and attainment developed by the original
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. That Order was in turn an heir to the
Hermeticists, Alchemists and Magi of the Renaissance and of the
Classical world. The practices of the Golden Dawn lodges were built upon
the foundation of Hermetic and Qabalistic philosophy, though the outward
form of their rituals and symbolism were sociologically derived and
culturally biased. The first Chief of the Order, S.L. Macgregor-Mathers
(Fr. D.D.C.F.), admitted this in his final statement to the Order before
his death. As reported by his wife and lifelong collaborator, Moina
Bergsen Mathers (Sr. V.N.R.), he said: *"He asks that you should keep
intact the official Instruction of the Order, knowing that he received
it in a direct line from the most pure Rosicrucian sources, even though
these Mysteries are found somewhat modified in their exterior form, for
reasons of Tribe and Culture."* So we conclude that the form of the
Golden Dawn system is modifiable "for reasons of Tribe and Culture," and
in fact requires of us to do so given the vast cultural differences
between 1888 England and ourselves today. Since the essence of the
Golden Dawn constitutes "mysteries," and insofar as they are valid they
transcend culture, every time the culture shifts, the Mysteries must be
"rediscovered" -- which is to say they must be re-cast into a form that
has the desired effect of Initiation and Exaltation on practitioners
belonging to the new culture. Therefore Het-Nuit Lodge, our working
body, is undertaking to redact the existing forms of the Golden Dawn
System to work more efficiently and correctly within a culture that is
radically different from the Anglican Christian/Victorian Era from which
the originals came. Entering on a new millennium is as good a time as
any for a new start, so it is fitting that Het-Nuit Lodge grew out of a
ritual workshop held in February of 2001ev. So far, this redaction has
taken on certain distinct aspects: Open Source Magick: The revelation of
the once-secret Hermetic symbols and philosophies that are the
foundation of the Golden Dawn's system has long since occurred, yet we
still see Lodges swearing their Aspirants to absolute secrecy with
mighty oaths of death and destruction, if they dare to reveal to the
uninitiated the "secret knowledge" which the uninitiated could buy
cheaply at a used book store. We see no reason to follow this defunct
and even harmful approach. Instead, following the demonstrably
advantageous practice of the Open Source Software movement, we build our
Order on the sources of knowledge that are accessible to anyone. Our
sources are already open; we simply affirm this obvious fact. We have no
"secrets" to conceal, in particular those that have already been
revealed. And in any case, the era of artificial secrecy is at an end.
Ours is the Information Age, and we embrace it fully. Therefore we
ordain and establish our order as the Open Source Order of the Golden
Dawn. New Aeon: Het-Nuit bases its authority to redact the GD system on
the concept of Aeonic Evolution. The early years of the 20th century
mark the "dawning of the Age of Aquarius," which was the ending of the
Modern Era that began with the European Enlightenment and concluded with
the Second World War. It was the period that saw the original GD Order
explode into schisms, and also saw Aleister Crowley's writing of*Liber
AL*, the Book of the Law. These things are not at all a "co-incidence,"
but rather a line drawn in the sands of time. The old must be put to
rest and the new be born. Freedom of Information: We agree with Robert
Anton Wilson, who said, "Accuracy of signal and free flow of information
define sanity in my epistemology." Our ritual works, commentaries,
instructional documents, diagrams and formulae are all available to the
general public, for free without restriction. Our primary means of
distribution is the World Wide Web, chosen for it's economy and ease of
universal access. Therefore, as we produce works they will be tested in
our own lives, modified if need be according to insights gained through
our own experience and that of others with whom we share them (like the
'beta testing' of computer software) to assure ourselves of their
efficacy, and then, upon our satisfaction, released to the general
public by posting them to our website in open 'pdf' or similar format.
Anyone will be allowed and is encouraged to download and use the rites,
etc. The files will be open and editable, allowing the user to easily
make changes at will. This approach preserves the integrity of our
original work while giving users the freedom to apply their own
intelligence and insight in light of their own necessity. Thelema:
Het-Nuit Lodge is not an attempt to rebuild the Golden Dawn on the basis
of 'purely Thelemic' principles, but Thelema informs and transforms the
understanding and purpose of our Work. Without going into deep
discussion of Thelemic philosophy, we take inspiration from the idea the
"Ra-Hoor-Khuit hath taken his seat in the East at the Equinox of the
Gods" *(AL I.49)* and alter our rituals accordingly. We operate from the
paradigm that the Aeon has changed and Horus (Ra-Hoor-Khuit) is its
avatar, as Osiris (Ausar-Un-Nefer) was the avatar of the previous Age of
Pisces. We hold these truths to be self-evident: that every man and
every woman is a Star, and has a 'True' Will in life, one that can be
discovered by the invocation of the Higher Genius found in us all. Once
having discovered one's 'True' Will, then one has no right but to do
that Will. That Love is the Law, and Love under 'True' Will is Perfect
Love. Duty: The Order will not require or promote any form of moral
dogma, religious canon, apocalyptic doctrine or political philosophy. In
keeping with the well-established and eminently wise tradition of the
original Order, the civil, moral and religious beliefs and practices of
the individual members are none of the Order's business, however much
the teachings and practices of the Order may deepen awareness of one's
commitments. The Order exists for one reason and one reason only: the
elevation of individual human beings from ignorance of their true nature
to Magical Adepthood. The Order asks nothing of its Initiates but a
sincere commitment to penetrate the Occult Mysteries and apply the
knowledge gained to their own lives in a productive and compassionate
manner. The only duty to our Order of the Golden Dawn is the Aspirant's
duty to his or her Higher Self, to their own True Will and spiritual
destiny, and to the comity of the community. It is our greatest desire
and fondest hope that others will take what we have done and build on it
for the future, adapting it without breaking it, to work as well for
themselves. Universalism: The original Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn
was steeped in the Protestant Christian mythology and symbolism that
typified the era and the religious background of the original members.
The Het-Nuit Lodge, on the other hand, was established by 21st century
Pagans, who do not subscribe to the Pauline Christian philosophy of a
"fallen" humanity in need of redemption from our sinful nature. Instead,
our true nature is that of the gods, and the source of our suffering is
our ignorance that masks our true nature from ourselves. As Pagans, we
also hold that a multifarious expression of the Divine is more
representative of its actual Nature than a monotheistic one. This is not
to exclude all forms of magical practice and ritual based on
Judeo-Christian mythology, but rather to include the rest of the rich
mythological history of the World's cultures on an equal basis. As has
been said, "There is none but contains a Ray from the Ineffable Light
you are seeking." The basic symbolism of our Temple and Rituals reflect
these principles in their form and function, but are built upon the same
foundation of a graded system of spiritual development based on the
Hermetic and Qabalistic principles that transcend all outward forms. We
have, as much as possible, diminished the Yahwistic and Christian
influences that marked the old Aeon manifestation of the Order. Yahweh
no longer has primacy as in the Hebraic Qabala, as we acknowledge the
Caananite and broader context of which the Hebrew Qabala is product and
a remnant. We exalt the Egyptian and Hellenic Pagan archetypes as
applied to interpreting the Qabalistic Tree of Life, which figures so
prominently in the Golden Dawn system. Our use of the Qabalah and the
Hebrew alphabet is as a system of symbolic glyphs and magickal names
particularly well suited to the learning process. Form and Function: The
formula of the Dying and Resurrected God (Osiris) is replaced in our
Temple by the formula of the Crowned and Conquering Child (Horus). We
find the focus on death and sacrifice a distraction from the
sufficiently daunting task of creating a sustainable magickal life in
this post-modern era. Birth, and the challenges that ensue, inspire us
to Adeptship. In much of our temple work, we use the Egyptian, Enochian
or Thelemic godforms instead of those of the Semitic Archangels. We have
done some re-assignment of symbolic positions of the Temple Officers.
Horus is the Heirophant of the Temple in the East, replacing his father
Osiris, and his former place in the West is taken by Set. Not only is
this redaction consistent with the new Aeon, it also reflects current
scholarship in Egyptology that was unknown 100 years ago. Like any
Golden Dawn form, we are an Initiatory teaching order. What we teach is
a progressively tiered system of spiritual development designed to
invoke the Higher or Divine Genius latent in every human being. By this
invocation can a person discover and follow his or her True Will, and
have both the power and the wisdom to effectively use the tools of
Hermetic magick. In short, our goal is to normalize Adeptship***.***
*From our hearts and minds, into the hands of all humanity, we issue
this Manifesto, with the unanimous assent of the Membership, on the 23rd
day of September, Two-thousand and Two of the Common Era.* *So mote it
be,* *The Members of the Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn*

*For the Order:*

Frater IO, *Chief Adept* Frater A.H.H.,*Praemonstrator* Soror H.e.H.,
*Cancellarius* Frater A.o.C.,*Imperator and Scribe* *"May the benefit of
this act, and all acts, be dedicated unto the Complete Liberation and
the Supreme Enlightenment of all beings, everywhere, pervading space and
time, so mote it be. May the benefits of practice, ours and others, come
to fruition, ultimately and immediately, and we remain in a state of
presence."*
