---
author: admin
date: '2002-05-27 21:17:00'
layout: post
slug: memorial-day
status: publish
title: Memorial Day
wordpress_id: '838'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

It's nice to have an extra day off. I got to sleep in until I felt like
getting up this morning. I got up and did some webwork for an hour and a
half or so on the site for [the Anunnaki
Project](http://www.anunnaki.org) in order to try to get things done
with a project there. We want to the website do have all of its current
projects done before [Origins II](http://www.anunnaki.org/origins) this
Friday. **Remember to attend this if you are local!** Eventually, I
decided that I needed breakfast food and coffee. I don't have either
here (though I have refrigerated coffee beverages...). I normally get up
for work, take a shower, do one or two things and then go immediately to
work. I have my coffee there and don't eat until lunchtime (I know... I
know...). This leaves my pantry bare of breakfast type things,
especially since R and I tend to go out to breakfast on at least one
weekend day normally. I ran off to Noah's, had a bageldog there and then
hung out at Seattle's Best Coffee on Broadway drinking a 2o oz. triple
white chocolate mocha and reading through my latest novel, the
[Archangel
Protocol](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0451458273/), which is
actually being quite entertaining. I finished [King
Rat](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0312890729/) the other day,
which was a phenomenal first novel from one of my favorite authors. I
also had a short chat with R on the phone and let her know the
micro-weasel's current frisky status. Through complete chance, I ran
into and here on the Hill. I got a chance to chat with her a bit while
he got a massage and then we hung out for a little while. I'm home doing
a few computer things now and writing an e-mail to my initiator in the
Aurum Solis about spiritual matters. ;-) I'm going to go try to buy some
decent shirts in the next little while (I can never find nice cotton
shirts that I like...) and then go to fire spinning class this evening.
Busy busy.
