--- 
wordpress_id: 1041
layout: post
title: Greek and Grad School
date: 2002-12-05 04:24:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=1041
---
So, it is looking more and more likely that I won't be able to enter a Classics graduate program with a heruclean effort (heh). It seems that just about everyone not only wants me to know Greek and Latin <em>before</em> I apply but that they would like <strong>four</strong> years of each. In short: fuck that. I'm taking Ancient Greek in the evenings currently and just doing that for the next nine months to get one year of Greek down is going to be enough of a bitch. At least at that point, I can start reading simple things. I'm hoping to get two years in...but four plus four of Latin? I might as well go back for a BA and just do it right. I'm feeling a bit down on this considering I spent the vast majority of my evening studying Greek tonight and doing homework and I have to do this on at least two evenings a week along with lesser work on other days in order to pass my quizes every week and learn anything. I should have started with Latin. heh. So, Religious Studies it is. It was a better fit anyway. Of course, the only Graduate level religion related program in this state is the MA in Comparative Religion from the University of Washington. I'm not sure if I should bother. I'm considering perhaps getting an MA in something locally and then transfering to a PhD program in Religious Studies elsewhere. I don't know if this Comparitive Religion program would be worth anything but perhaps. Otherwise, there is a good History school at the UW though I'm not sure what kind of freedmon I would have in it. On the plus side, with my BA in Anthropology and an MA in History, I could probably teach somewhere... The really sick thing is that if I wanted to get a MS in Computer Science, my work would completely pay for it. Even though I play an engineer on TV and I come from a family of engineers (and ministers), I'm not sure that I wouldn't wind up in a clock tower with a rifle. I'm feeling a bit stymied in the whole Grad school planning thing right now, like I'm treading water. Meanwhile, R will probably take a class this spring that she needs and then enter a Graduate school locally in the next year for her plans. Maybe I should just try to buy my dad's house and plan on being local for another five years. I dunno.