---
author: admin
date: '2002-11-29 03:48:00'
layout: post
slug: i-live
status: publish
title: I Live!
wordpress_id: '1036'
categories:
- Books
- Daily Life
---
So, I'm at 's parents place in Berkeley, CA. We had our mighty turkey day feast earlier and I got exposed to thirteen (!) of her relatives. I seem to be passing the appropriate parental tests as her parents are speaking to me and making small talk and such. I've got them snowed as to my worth! ;-)

I'm using R's mother's imac and squeaky modem collection to check my e-mail and write this. I feel very 1995.

R's brother and his girlfriend leave town tomorrow afternoon and we have the car for most of the weekend after that. We heard that Thelema Lodge was doing 2nd degree initiations on Saturday but we didn't bring our regalia and aren't sure that we'd want to go anyway, it being vacation and us having just gone to them (mine) a couple of weeks ago.

Yesterday we went down to Telegraph and his Shambhala Books, one of my favorite little bookshops. I picked up a copy of Chagdud Rinpoche's book on Buddhist practices and teachings (his only general one) that I didn't have. We hit a used bookstore and I picked up a book by Kevin Kelly (??), the original editor of <strong>Wired</strong> magazine. I managed to get a reviewer's copy of Bruce Sterling's upcoming non-fiction, futurist book <strong>Tomorrow Now</strong> last week (it doesn't come out until late December) and am almost done with it. He highly recommends Kevin (or is it Ken?) Kelly's work and says it is very underrated. Since I found a hardcover for $4 of one of his books, I figured "Why not?"

Sterling's book is quite good and I'm going to recommend it to my friends though it will be a while until a cheap edition is out. I quite like his work, especially his non-fiction, and I'm on the Viridian e-mail list he maintains. A lot of his themes from his novels are echoed in these books. His short story, <strong>Green Days in Brunei</strong> has always been strangely inspirational to me. It's in one of his main short story collections (his short work is quite good) and I recommend. Sterling, along with Freeman Dyson, and a few others is one of my personal saints.

I'm also reading a novel (rule: when flying all over and staying with "family" for holidays, bring twice as many books as you think you'll need...) called <strong>Gates of Fire</strong> which is about the Spartan battle against the Persians at Thermopylae. I can't emphasize how excellent that book is. It's incredible and I've almost completely devoured it in the last two days of travel and such. I'm told the author has written a second period book set during a famous Greek naval engagement but I don't recall the details. If you're a classics geek at all, read this...

Nothing much was open today, the downside of the holidays...R and I put our diet off for the day so we could enjoy the meal with the family and there was the typical load o' food. Tomorrow we're going to look around shops and get out. I saw some wonderful Buddhist import places with nice statuary though I might have trouble bringing one of the nice phurbas back on the plane... I've made my desire to go to one of the huge flea markets that they have around here known as well.

R's mother told us that one of the museums in San Francisco has an Egyptian exhibit from the British Museum. Apparantly, the British Museum is being redone so they have parts of their Egyptian collection all over the world right now. I want to try to go see that and we still might go down to San Jose to see the AMORC museum. R's mom has been there and she recommended it when it got brought up as well. R wants to visit with some old friends so we may go out for drinks in the evening as well.

Sadly, the one friend that I did try to get in touch with, Sam Webster, hasn't gotten back to me. I left him a message saying I'd be in town until Sunday as I'd like to meet up for coffee. I didn't plan a lot around this trip or I'd be trying to hook up with more Thelemites or pagans that I've met in the area. Ah well.
