--- 
wordpress_id: 998
layout: post
title: Weekends and such
date: 2002-10-28 21:02:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=998
---
So, we shipped MSN8 last week. If you go to any of the major news outlets, you'll see a review of it (like the Washington Post, or PC Magazine or the New York Times). They are largely favorable, especially for the area that I ran the test team for: Parental Controls. I'm happy that we've been mentioned favorably in almost every review and I'm <strong>very</strong> happy that we've shipped. I've been working about half time on our new project, which is within Windows, and I can now concentrate fully there. This will make my day to day life a bit easier. We had a goodbye lunch for one of my contractors on Friday. He's going to go work for another team now that we've shpped. This isn't so bad since we're now free to hang out a bit easier as I am no longer the "boss." He's come to some OTO stuff and has interests in Thelema. Since we shipped, I got a couple of extra days off. I'm home today and tomorrow and I'll get 11/11 and 11/12 off too. Combined with Thanksgiving, I'm winding up with most of a month of three day work weeks. That really breaks my heart. <strong>;-)</strong> R and I spent most of the weekend quietly together and didn't go out a whole bunch except for a big chunk in the middle of Saturday for local OTO initiations that we attended and witnessed. We watched a bunch of cable, cleaned the house a bit and I practiced my skills at Neverwinter Nights. Today was more of the same but R has just gone to work. I'm going to go down to "La Tienda" in a few and pick up a couple Day of the Dead items for our shrine in the living room. We tried to go yesterday but they were closed. We did get our new passport pictures for our trip to Greece. Tomorrow is my five hour tattoo session. I'm getting my first tattoo, which will be on my upper, right arm. It's a scarab beetle with the sun and it should cover my entire upper arm. We're going to <em>attempt</em> to do it in one sitting. We'll see how well that works... I'm sure to be a hurtin' unit tomorrow night and I have Greek then too. Combining this with my big dental cleaning on Thursday, this will, indeed, be the week of achy pain... Anyway, I'm off to view smiling dead things. Ta ta!