---
author: admin
date: '2003-09-15 23:39:00'
layout: post
slug: tseyalgar-continued
status: publish
title: Tseyalgar Continued
wordpress_id: '1888'
categories:
- Buddhism
---

Trying to pick up the thread from where I left off... Ed and Jason
showed up and we hung out for the rest of the retreat. The normal
retreat routine is to get up around 8:00 AM, stumble around looking for
food and coffee, especially coffee, because we didn't sleep more than
six hours, and then get to Tsegyalgar in time for Norbu to arrive at
10:00 am. He teaches for a couple of hours in the 90+ degree heat (he
needs to keep it hot because of something to do with his body since he
had a life threatening illness a decade ago) and we try to listen
intently, practice ritual as necessary and not pass out. ;-) Afterwards,
he goes off to whatever else he is doing and the rest of us go have
lunch on site there. Usually, the three of us would go to one of the
nearby towns afterwards though we stayed at Tsegyalgar all afternoon on
a few occasions. In the afternoon, there would be teachings by senior
Dzogchen Community members, group practices or just people hanging out
and chatting. In the evening, there was usually a nightly event of some
sort, such as a presentation on Tibetan Medicine, and people often had
dinner together at the site. The only really required events were the
times when Norbu was teaching. During the course of the retreat, we also
had two Ganapujas or ritual feasts. The first one was on the first day
and it was because it was a full moon (yes, dearie, they do full moon
rituals). The second one was to close the teaching retreat. The Dzogchen
Community has a reputation for being a bit looser than a lot of the
Buddhist groups and it lived up to it. Most Buddhists don't seem to like
to drink much and are always conditioned by Sutra teachings against that
sort of thing but the Dzogchen teachings don't necessarily require that
kind of conduct (or not require it for that matter) and the group likes
to have a party. Usually by the time the feast ritual was over, wine and
beer began to be passed around freely, there was dancing and generally a
good time was had. It was good to see a Buddhist group that didn't seem
hung up about these things. Jason and Ed left on Saturday evening before
the final feast as Ed had to work the next day in New York City and they
wanted to get back by Midnight there. The last morning, following this,
Norbu gave the lungs for about 18 different practices or boddhisatvas,
depending on how you wanted to divide things up. That's quite a bit
since you normally get one or two in a sitting. This involves either the
empowerment of all of us to practice the mantras for a particular figure
or practice through the transmission of just the mantra by Norbu
Rinpoche (or, theoretically, another qualified party) or actually has
him speed reading the entire practice to us in Tibetan. In the Tibetan
Buddhist and Dzogchen cosmology, they speak of body, speech and mind.
Body is the concrete realm of experience that, obviously, our bodies are
in and that we interact with directly. Mind is mental realm that you
interact with through visualization and other mental practices. Speech
is the realm of energy and sound conveys and is, in some sense, this
energy. This is the reason for the spoken transmission of mantras, which
are in sanskrit and don't necessarily translate intelligibly beyond
being words of power for a particular thing, and for the vocal
transmission of practices, even by reading them aloud to an assembled
group. This is how the energy of these things is transfered to people...
With these transmissions, I have all of the common ones that I would
need to work with Norbu Rinpoche's teachings and practices and some of
the uncommon ones. I had specifically requested Simhamukha and the
Garuda Practice, both of which he gave. People have asked what I get
from all of this. What I get from Tantric Buddhism depends on the
circumstance. It is a fully magical path and way of working with the
world, its energies and the nature of mind to these. It is much more
concrete than a lot of the slapdash stuff that we roll for ourselves in
the West at times. It is also a lot more narrow in certain ways since it
is part of an unbroken faith with all of the rules and regulations that
can be accreted onto it over time. Norbu's way of teaching draws back
towards the older and more magical traditions of India. The old saints
didn't walk around with encyclopedias in their hair. They had practices
and oral teachings and they did them. Sometimes they'd compare notes
based on their realizations and things would evolve. Much of what you
see in Tibetan Buddhism evolved as part of the monastic culture in Tibet
and the need for monks to find things to do with themselves. That's how
you end up with 's infamous "Big Rigzin", the 400+ page puja that they
were forced to spend five hours chanting that is almost all just prayers
and the like chanted aloud. The core of essential practice isn't like
this, even in Vajrayana. Going beyond this, Dzogchen itself is about
awareness and self-liberation. Norbu has made it clear that it belongs
to no one religion or philosophy. We are intrinsically liberated beings
but that knowledge is obscured from us and we are living in ignorance.
This should sound familiar to most Gnostics. Dzogchen is about
liberating ourselves to awareness of this intrinsic nature and teaches
methods for doing so. These methods apply regardless of tradition
because, in the end, we are all people and have the same basic
condition. Jason and I spent quite a bit of time discussing this in the
context of Western magic and pagan practice and there is really no
reason why Dzogchen cannot be used in that context, especially over time
as people gain actual realization. In that sense, it is something of
value to anyone. On a personal level, I'm interested in the higher yogic
practices involving transmutation and working with energies, within the
mind and otherwise (though that is a false dualism) and in Dzogchen.
This is something that is hard to get in this manner from most teachers
of Tibetan Buddhism. I'm not interested in becoming an orthodox
practitioner though. I'm not joining the Tibetan Church. I will always
be a practitioner and a sorceror before any of these things.
