---
author: admin
date: '2003-03-22 05:07:00'
layout: post
slug: matrix-metaphysics
status: publish
title: Matrix Metaphysics
wordpress_id: '1323'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

In preparation for the coming movies, the Matrix website has added
essays on some philosophical problems, ideas or aspects of the world of
the Matrix. I get to combine my Science Fiction and Philosophy interests
for once here...
[http://whatisthematrix.warnerbros.com/rl\_cmp/phi.html](http://whatisthematrix.warnerbros.com/rl_cmp/phi.html)
One of these is relating things to Plato's allegory of the Cave. I
include that one below. **Plato's Cave & *The Matrix*** by John
Partridge *John Partridge is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at
Wheaton College in Norton, Massachusetts where he teaches courses in
aesthetics, philosophy and literature, and the philosophy of the
emotions. He received a Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins University and has
published articles on Plato in **Ancient Philosophy** and **Skepsis**.*

> “Philosophy involves seeing the absolute oddity of what is familiar
> and trying to formulate really probing questions about it.” –Iris
> Murdoch*^[1](#one)^* “They say about me that I am the strangest
> person, always making people confused.” –Socrates^[2](#two)^

Imagine a dark, subterranean prison in which humans are bound by their
necks to a single place from infancy. Elaborate steps are taken by
unseen forces to supply and manipulate the content of the prisoner’s
visual experience. This is so effective that the prisoners do not
recognize their imprisonment and are satisfied to live their lives in
this way. Moreover, the cumulative effects of this imprisonment are so
thorough that if freed, the prisoners would be virtually helpless. They
could not stand up on their own, their eyes would be overloaded
initially with sensory information, and even their minds would refuse to
accept what the senses eventually presented them. It is not unreasonable
to expect that some prisoners would wish to remain imprisoned even after
their minds grasped the horror of their condition. But if a prisoner was
dragged out and compelled to understand the relationship between the
prison and outside, matters would be different. In time the prisoner
would come to have genuine knowledge superior to the succession of
representations that made up the whole of experience before. This freed
prisoner would understand those representations as imperfect—like pale
copies of the full reality now grasped in the mind. Yet if returned to
the prison, the freed prisoner would be the object of ridicule,
disbelief, and hostility.

**I. Introduction**

Viewers of *The Matrix* remember the moment in the film when Neo is
released from his prison and made to grasp the truth of his life and the
world. The account above roughly captures that turning point in the 1999
film, and yet it is drawn from an image crafted almost twenty-four
hundred years ago by the Greek philosopher, Plato (427-347 B.C.E.).
Today the *Republic* is the most influential work by Plato, and the
allegory of the Cave the most famous part of the *Republic.* If you know
that Socrates was tried, convicted, and sentenced to death by drinking
hemlock, or that Socrates thought that the unexamined life is not worth
living, you may also know that Socrates in the *Republic* likened the
human condition to the state of prisoners bound in a cave seeing only
shadows projected on the wall in front of them. Transcending this state
is the aim of genuine education, conceived as a release from
imprisonment, a turning or reorientation of one’s whole life, an upward
journey from darkness into light:

> The release from the bonds, the turning around from shadows to statues
> and the light of the fire and, then, the way up out of the cave to the
> sunlight…: [education] has the power to awaken the best part of the
> soul and lead it upward to the study of the best among the things that
> are.^[3](#three)^

The allegory of the Cave gives literary shape to Socrates’ most
fundamental concern, namely that our souls be in the best condition
possible (Plato, *Apology* 30a7-b4). Socrates also believed he was
commanded by the god Apollo to practice philosophy; it both animated and
cost him his life. Yet it is not obvious how philosophical investigation
improves the condition of the soul—still less how the Socratic method in
particular does so, consisting as it does in testing the consistency of
a person’s beliefs through a series of questions Socrates asks. I
believe, and will show here, that the allegory of the Cave is part of
Plato’s effort to make philosophical sense of Socrates’ philosophical
life, to link Socrates’ persistent questioning to his unwavering aim at
what he called the “care of the soul.” On this theme of care of the
soul, there is a deep resonance between *The Matrix* and Plato’s thought
in the *Republic*. Like the allegory of the Cave, *The Matrix*
dramatically conveys the view that ordinary appearances do not depict
true reality and that gaining the truth changes one’s life. Neo’s
movements toward greater understanding nicely parallel the movements of
the prisoner in the cave whose bonds are loosened. The surface
similarities between the film and the allegory can run to a long
catalog. The first paragraph of this essay reveals some of these
connections. But there remains a deeper affinity between the two that I
shall draw out here, especially in Part IV, having to do with Socrates’
notion of the care of the soul. To see what I am calling a deeper
connection between the film and the allegory of the Cave, I begin in
Part II by recounting the context in which the Cave appears and the
philosophical positions it figuratively depicts.^[4](#four)^ In Part III
I compare and contrast the film and the allegory, focusing attention on
the difficulty in sorting out deceptive sensory information. Finally, in
Part IV I examine the warnings and concessions Plato places in the
dramatic spaces of *Republic*. The allegory of the Cave is a strange
image, as one of Socrates’ friends says (515a4), while Socrates himself
confesses that the Cave is not exact (504b5; cf. 435c9-d2).^[5](#five)^
Rereading the Cave after a recent viewing of the film shows that these
are not throwaway remarks. *The Matrix* likewise privileges the work
that strangeness and calculated vagueness do; Morpheus, after all,
cannot show Neo what he most needs to see, but must get him to see for
himself something that is difficult to recognize. In this way, *The
Matrix* and Plato’s Cave are faithful to a central tenet in Socrates’
philosophical examinations: that proper teaching only occurs when
students are prepared to make discoveries for themselves. Furthermore,
the discovery that is most crucial is the discovery of oneself.
Readiness for self-examination is, after all, what makes “care of the
soul” possible.

**II. Plato’s Cave**

If Plato’s *Republic* has a single unifying theme, it is to show that
the life of the just person is intrinsically preferable to any other
life. In order to prove this, Socrates is made to investigate the
concept of “justice.” After an elaborate effort that spans three of the
ten books of the *Republic*, Socrates and his two interlocutors discover
what justice is. Justice is shown to be a property of a soul in which
its three parts do their proper work and refrain from doing the job of
another part. Specifically, reason must rule the other parts of the
soul. Only under the rule of reason is the soul’s harmonious arrangement
secured and preserved. Plato glosses this idea memorably by calling such
a soul healthy. Just persons have psychic health; their personality is
integrated in the proper way. At the end of Book Four, there is one main
gap in the argument: what is the precise role of reason, the “best part
of the soul” mentioned in the passage above? There is little to go on at
this stage. We know only that the soul in which reason does its job well
is called wise, and wisdom is a special kind of knowledge: knowledge of
the good. How are we to arrive at this knowledge? What is it like to
possess it? What sort of thing is the good? The allegory of the Cave
speaks to these questions.^[6](#six)^ In order to impress upon us the
importance of these questions, Book Seven of the *Republic* begins with
a startling image of our ignorance. It is the allegory of the Cave:

> Imagine human beings living in an underground, cavelike dwelling, with
> an entrance a long way up, which is both open to the light and as wide
> as the cave itself. They’ve been there since childhood, fixed in the
> same place, with their necks and legs fettered, able to see only in
> front of them, because their bonds prevent them from turning their
> heads around. Light is provided by a fire burning far above and behind
> them. Also behind them, but on higher ground, there is a path
> stretching between them and the fire. Imagine that along this path a
> low wall has been built, like the screen in front of puppeteers above
> which they show their puppets . . . Then also imagine that there are
> people along the wall, carrying all kinds of artifacts that project
> above it—statues of people and other animals, made out of stone, wood,
> and every material. And, as you’d expect, some of the carriers are
> talking, and some are silent. (514a1-515a3)

Many contemporary readers recoil at the awful politics of the Cave. Who,
after all, are the “puppeteers”? Why do they deceive their fellow
cave-dwellers? Plato has so little to say about them that readers
quickly imagine their own worst fears; a totalitarian government or the
mass media struck mid- and late-20th Century readers as an obvious
parallel to the prisoners who move freely within the cave. But this gets
the aim of the cave wrong, I believe, since it deflects attention away
from the prisoners bound to the posts. “They are us,” Socrates says, and
this is what is truly sinister: an imprisonment that we do not recognize
because we are our own prison-keepers. Let us turn to examine these
prisoners and their imprisonment, specifically by examining the
philosophical stakes of their ignorance. Only then will we see exactly
why ignorance is likened to imprisonment and alienation. In the cave,
the prisoners can distinguish the different shadows and sounds (516c8-9,
cf. e8-9), apply names to the shadows depicting things (cf. 515b4-5),
and even discern the patterns in their presentation (516c9-10). To this
extent they have some true beliefs. But insofar as they believe that
this two-dimensional, monochromatic play of images—and the echoes
reverberating in the cave—is the whole of reality (515c1-2), they are
mistaken. Moreover, the opinions they have do not explain why the shapes
they see are as they are. They do not know the source of the shadows,
nor do they know that the sounds are not produced by the shadows but
rather by the unseen people moving the statues (515b7-9). The possession
of a few, small-scale, true beliefs characterizes the condition of all
of us, Plato believes. We can distinguish different things, but we lack
a systematic, causal explanation of them. To put it loosely, we have, at
best, assorted true beliefs about the *what* of things, but a mistaken
hold (if any) on the *why* of things. Socrates’ search for the
definition of justice here, like his search for definitions in other
Platonic dialogues, looks like an effort to get at these explanations,
to grasp why things are the way they are and, perhaps further, what
underlying relationship they have to one another. His questions are part
of a search for the essence of things, or what he calls their
“form.”^[7](#seven)^ For Plato, when we possess knowledge of the form of
a thing, we can give a comprehensive account of its essence. Without
grasp of the form, we can have at best only true beliefs. A simple
example should show what difference it makes to have knowledge of
forms.^[8](#eight)^ Suppose someone in the cave carries a chair in front
of the fire. The bound prisoners see the chair’s shadow on the cave
wall, and some of them remark, “There is a chair.” They are partially
correct. If they broke their bonds, they could turn to see the actual
chair. In this case their cognitive grip on the chair would be more
complete. They would be able to recognize that the shadow was less real
than the chair and that the chair is the cause of the shadow.
Ultimately, the physically-real chair is explained in terms of its
representation of the form of chair. After all, to have genuine
knowledge of a thing it is necessary for our intellects to grasp its
form. One might think of the difference this way. A shadow is better
grasped when the object casting it is seen. Plato would wish us to see
that, in a sense, ordinary objects are like mere shadows of forms. Thus,
to grasp objects as fully as possible, one must attain a grasp of its
form. There is a curious complication on the horizon that I shall point
out here. It turns out that knowing the form of a thing is not
sufficient for gaining a final understanding of that thing. Even to know
fully the form of chair, Plato holds, one must know the form of the
good. This does not make sense at first. Recall, the form of the good is
what reason ought, ideally, to know, for in knowing it you become wise.
Furthermore, knowing the form of the good contributes to your being a
just person, since one part of you, reason, is doing its job (and this
is what it means for you to be just). Now Plato suggests that grasping
the form of the good or the good-itself (the terms are interchangeable;
see note 7) is necessary for attaining the best intellectual grasp of
*anything* that our intellects can know. The distinctive importance of
the form of the good is indicated by two images that immediately precede
the Cave: the Sun and the Line, and I will consider them now. The Sun
analogy (507a ff.) reveals the special epistemological role played by
the good-itself. Just as the natural world depends upon the sun (for
warmth and light), so too the intelligible world depends on the
good-itself (508b13-c2).^[9](#nine)^ This is the force of the light
metaphor. The sun, as Plato puts it, gives the power to see to seers,
while the form of the good gives the power to know to knowers (508e1-3).
In our example of the chair, it is only in virtue of the light produced
by the fire above and behind the prisoners that the chair and its shadow
are visible. The fire, then, is a condition for our acquiring a more
complete true belief about the shadow. But the fire is nothing more than
a “source of light that is itself a shadow in relation to the sun”
(532c2-3). Out of the cave the sun represents the good-itself. The
good-itself illuminates the true, intelligible world of ultimate
reality, and in this way, the form of chair relies on the form of the
good for its intelligibility. The good-itself is the most preeminent
item in the universe. It is both an object of knowledge and the
condition of fully knowing other objects of knowledge. Plato is not
finished with his specification of the role played by the form of the
good. He goes on to suggest that the good-itself nourishes the being of
intelligible things in a way analogous to the sun nourishing organic
life. For this unusual idea we have some help from the Line image (509d
ff), the most obscure of the three images. Imagine a vertical line
dividing two realms—physical reality and intelligible reality—into
unequal spaces. Each realm is then subdivided in the same uneven
proportion as that which separates the physical and intelligible world.
To take only the smaller, bottom portion of the line, we find the
physical realm divided between actual, physically-existing items and
their ephemeral copies (e.g., reflections in water, shadows, and
artistic depictions). In the Cave, this is the distinction made between
the chair and its shadow. And so too the Line presses us to think that
the physically real objects perceived by our senses are, in effect,
shadows—pale, diminished or distorted copies of something more real. The
Line offers a ranked order of Plato’s ontology according to which the
degrees of reality and being of a particular class of things increases
as you go up the line. The higher up the scale, the more real the items
become; and since the form of the good is the most real item in all of
reality, it is located at the very top of the Line, just above the
forms. Things lower on the line are derivative and owe whatever reality
or being that they have to the things above them. Physical objects are,
metaphorically, nourished by their corresponding forms. They depend for
their very reality, not just their knowability, on the perfect, eternal
Forms existing in the intelligible realm. One clear implication of the
Line is the metaphor of ascent. The Cave exploits it as well: the upward
escape from the cave represents the difficulty of gaining ever more
abstract knowledge while not relying on information gathered by the
senses. By connecting the three images together we discover that the
human condition is abject: we see only the most downgraded forms of
reality (image, shadows) and are as far from the sun (the good-itself)
as we can be. This is what it is to be ignorant of the truth. But to see
why our alienation from what is genuinely good makes a difference in our
lives, there is one more feature of the good-itself that deserves
attention. Whatever exactly the form of the good is, it serves as a
paradigm or model, and it has a remarkable effect on those who grasp it.
As Socrates says of fully-educated philosophers near the end of Book
Seven, “once they’ve seen the good-itself, they must each in turn put
the city, its citizens, and themselves in order, using it as their model
(*paradeigmati*)” (540a8-b1). This was anticipated in a longer passage
in which the philosopher, by means of studying the “things that are”
(500b9), acts as a craftsman (cf. 500d6), or a “painter using a divine
model (*paradeigmati*)” (500e3-4). Not only do physical things take on
the qualities they have through a process of copying, reflecting or
imitating the forms, so too we can take on goodness through intellectual
contact with the good-itself.^[10](#ten)^ By coming to understand the
good-itself, we become like it. In short, we become good. We can see now
why being just depends on knowing the form of the good. Reason’s rule
affords the soul the opportunity to study and therein to become like the
good-itself, that is, properly proportioned, well ordered, healthy.
Finally, once this knowledge is acquired, and the self is transformed,
one becomes productive.^[11](#eleven)^ Those who gain knowledge of the
good-itself are capable of crafting virtues in their souls and in the
souls of others, and they can paint divine constitutions for cities.
This is what enables Plato to put words into Socrates’ mouth that, were
he on Aristophanes’ stage, would have returned thunderous laughter:

> Until philosophers rule as kings or those who are now called kings and
> leading men genuinely and adequately philosophize, that is, until
> political power and philosophy entirely coincide . . . cities will
> have no rest from evils, Glaucon, nor, I think, will the human race.
> (473c11-d6)

**III. Plato’s Cave and *The Matrix***

There are no forms in *The Matrix*, and thus our epistemic and
metaphysical circumstances in Plato’s *Republic* look very different
from those in the film. The world inside the cave is a diminished one, a
shadow or reflection of the real, but broadly continuous with the true
world. Even though there is a marked difference between the sensible and
intelligible realms viz. method, epistemic certainty, and metaphysical
reality, on Plato’s view the sensible is somehow derived from the
intelligible. Thus, for Plato, our speaking and thinking in the cave is
not meaningless, and some of our opinions are true, in spite of our
ignorance of the deeper causes of things. In *The Matrix*, by contrast,
the two worlds are far less continuous with one another. The real world
is profoundly dystopian, and the substance of lives inside the Matrix is
supplied in mental states almost entirely cut off from this reality.
(Ironically, the real world in *The Matrix* is very like the world
inside the cave.) In spite of its realism, the world inside the Matrix
is not a copy of the real world but is a simulation. Nevertheless, there
is at least one continuity between the real world and the
computer-simulated world: your body. Owing to an unexplained principle,
called “residual body memory,” your body looks the same to you and to
others in both worlds. And you are able to retain your memories of one
world when you are in the other and when you return back to the first.
(This means that Cypher will have to have his memories of the time spent
outside the Matrix removed if he is to return to the illusion of reality
inside the Matrix.) Since the real world and the simulated world are
worlds in which the senses receive information, the practical problem is
not that they are discontinuous, but that they are indiscernible. This
is part of the initial difficulty for Neo since he cannot determine
which sensory information is genuine and which false. Although he (and
the viewer) settles this question soon enough, a skeptical worry remains
in the wake: how can he ever be sure his sensory information is truthful
if there is no certificate of authenticity on his experiences? Suppose
Agent Smith creates a program that launches right when Neo picks up a
phone within the Matrix. Instead of being whisked back aboard the ship,
Neo’s consciousness is supplied with a computer-generated experience of
the interior of the Nebuchadnezzar, and of course he believes he has
successfully exited the Matrix. Such a trick might enable Agent Smith to
obtain compromising information about the Nebuchadnezzar and its crew
or, worse, the passwords for Zion. It is hard to imagine how Neo might
see past Agent Smith’s ruse, especially if he only had a few moments to
figure things out. Would Plato’s freed prisoner fair better? Recall,
Plato urges us to regard the sensible world as unreliable, no matter the
source of our information about it.^[12](#twelve)^ We must adopt a
different method for apprehending the truth of things. This is, of
course, not nearly as simple as it sounds, nor is it obviously helpful;
after all, what we are to grasp is the intelligible world from which our
ordinary, sensible world is copied, not the sensible world itself. The
reward is that once you grasp the forms in the intelligible world, you
would be an expert in discriminating items in the sensible world (cf.
520c1-6). This doesn’t mean you’d never be mistaken, however; rather,
you would simply be the best sensible world discriminator there could
be. Therefore, in the case where Agent Smith launches his deceptive
program, the only advantage the freed prisoner might have is slight: a
general unease about all sensory information. Since the ordinary world
is too murky and ever-changing to permit genuine knowledge of it, our
awareness of this mutability should assist us in determining which of
our beliefs were relatively more reliable. It seems that the
metaphysical differences between Plato and *The Matrix* do not prevent
them from telling a roughly similar story about the epistemological
unreliability of the senses and the need to abstract from the senses in
order to gain genuine knowledge. In fact, we find Neo at the end of the
film doing more than simply bending the laws of physics with the Matrix.
He has, it seems, stepped almost entirely out of that very world itself.
He does not, however, appear in two places at once, but his destruction
of one of the Agents, and his ability to fly, suggest that the laws of
physics are more than merely bent.

Where Plato’s dialogue and *The Matrix* agree most is in drawing out the
enormous psychological difficulty in calling the world into question and
the ethical dimensions of failing to do so. Neo and Plato’s freed
prisoner must accept truths about themselves (namely, that their lives
have been unreal) before they can acquire deeper knowledge about
fundamental truths. To achieve this, both Neo and the freed prisoner
need the shocking demonstration that the senses are inadequate and that
they can be systematically deceived. Both then undertake an
introspective turn to discover the truth, and must take steps to
disregard knowledge derived from the senses. This is the point to ask,
finally, what knowledge Neo attains that operates in him like the
knowledge of the Platonic form of the good. What does Neo know only
after great difficulty but whose truth is fundamental? What object is
grasped by Neo’s intellect that he understands to be the condition of
his knowing anything else? What knowledge enables him to be productive,
to be a savior of himself and others? It is nothing more than proper
self-understanding. In both *The Matrix* and in the Cave, there is a
single item the knowledge of which makes the knower more integrated and
more powerful, and for Neo it is self-knowledge. Ought we to see Neo as
adhering to the letter of Socratic self-examination and care of the
soul? Only at high-altitude will a perfect connection be visible. For
Neo’s enlightenment is ultimately about his own specific path and role.
Socratic care of the soul involves self-knowledge, but the parts of
yourself that are peculiar to you, that make up your individuality, are
not relevant.^[13](#thirteen)^ Since the prisoners in the cave have only
dim self-awareness (they see only the shadows of themselves [515a5-8]),
it might seem that release involves getting the right beliefs about
oneself. But the very abstractness of the knowledge that Plato prizes,
which is very unlike the specificity of the knowledge that Neo
eventually gets (namely, that he is the One), suggests that the
self-knowledge the prisoners need is neither the end of their search nor
even the proper beginning. In other dialogues Socrates was made to
endorse the idea that knowledge was in you, that a kind of introspection
aided by proper questioning could elicit true beliefs. But these are not
truths that are *about* you, rather they are truths that are *in* you.
Neo’s case is different. The truths he must grasp are both in him and
about him. The film reveals furthermore how he must demonstrate and
experience his capabilities before he is able to believe entirely that
he possesses them. And when he believes in himself at last, his
capabilities are further enhanced. *This* result is produced neither by
the method nor the aim of Socratic care of the soul. Most fundamentally,
the film and the allegory share a pedagogical conceit. Both hold that in
teaching the most basic truths, there is an important role for a
strategic strangeness and the confusion it produces. The allegory of the
Cave puzzles Socrates’ audience, yet as it hooks them, the Cave provides
only the outline for solving the puzzle. Might Morpheus be doing the
same? Might Morpheus, like the allegory, act as a kind of Socratic
teacher, urging Neo toward self-understanding and care for his soul?

**IV. Socratic Education in the Cave and *The Matrix***

To see to what extent this is so, I want now to return to a remark by
Socrates’ friend, Glaucon, that the cave and its prisoners are “strange”
(*atopon . . . atopous*, [515a4]). The remark is important because it
indicates that the image is operating on its audience in a particular
way, one that Plato elsewhere gives us reason to believe is significant.
Prompting someone to recognize strangeness, something being out of place
(*atopia*), is how the Socratic method achieves one of its aims. This
can occur when Socrates asks one of his deceptively simple questions.
But it can also occur when he professes ignorance, or when he is silent.
Similarly, Plato’s allegory of the Cave describes what our ignorance is
like in stark images and what it would be like to become educated; it
says nothing about what starts the process of becoming
educated.^[14](#fourteen)^ Of course, the imprisonment is metaphorical,
as is the release. Pressing for specific details is to demand too much
of the image. By refusing to say precisely how *this* prisoner is freed,
Plato retains the openness of his allegory.^[15](#fifteen)^ What are we
to say about *The Matrix*? On the surface, it appears the *The Matrix*
departs from the allegory. First of all, it gives answers to the
question above, for it is Morpheus who frees Neo, and Morpheus chooses
to free him because there is something particular about Neo that
recommends his release. Yet, on closer inspection, Neo’s early
encounters with Morpheus produce the same kind of confusion that
Socrates produces in his interlocutors. Neo receives strange
communications via computer (“wake up, Neo,”^[16](#sixteen)^) to follow
the white rabbit he soon sees on a tattooed shoulder. These odd messages
disrupt Neo’s expectations of the world, especially his need for control
over his life and his facility with computers. Another disruption comes
when Neo swallows the red pill. This drug quickly begins to alter his
perception of the stability of the world inside the
Matrix.^[17](#seventeen)^ Taken together, the computer messages
uncannily anticipate what is about to happen, while the pill calls into
question his grasp of what is now happening. This surely prepares Neo to
accept the truth that everything that has already happened is an
illusion. If we suppose that Morpheus asks the right questions, and
supplies the right drugs, it is still the case that Neo has to recognize
the questions and accept the drugs. Neo proves to be a particularly apt
pupil. Indeed, there are features of Neo’s life that might explain how
he begins to see the falsity of the world inside the Matrix. Neo is an
accomplished hacker who would have the best chance of anyone to discover
that the whole of his experience is itself nothing more than
highly-sophisticated computer code. He is also living a double life. He
works as a software engineer perhaps to maintain a steady income,
perhaps as cover for his underground activities. Maybe playing the role
of an office worker affords him a sense of the absurd that makes it
easier to believe that his life is hollow. Insomnia might work for this
purpose as well. Besides, who hasn’t had the gut feeling Neo has that
“there is something wrong with the world”? Of course, one of the themes
of the film is Neo’s struggle to accept his role as the One, the savior
of humanity. He is the subject of a number of prophecies made by the
Oracle.^[18](#eighteen)^ In fact, he is the only person whose prophecy
does not refer to someone other than himself. He only accepts his true
nature well after the series of strange clues Morpheus presents to him
and the confusion this produces in him. Ultimately, he must experience
first-hand his fitness for the special role that the others urge him to
perform. In this way, Morpheus can be seen as a Socratic gadfly,
stinging Neo to take the first steps he needs in order to discover the
truth on his own. Similarly, Plato’s sketch of the role played by the
form of the good only points the way to the complete answer that Plato
would have us seek out. In this way, Plato draws the reader to think for
him or herself in the same way that Socrates wished his interlocutors to
feel the sting of the realization of their ignorance as a motivation to
join him in inquiry and care of the soul. The allegory of the Cave
issues a pointed challenge: in what way are we living lives of
diminished prospect, resting content with our knowledge, failing even to
ask the right questions? These are precisely the questions Morpheus puts
to Neo. And like Morpheus, Plato’s pessimism about the human condition
gives way to an optimistic view of the power of education to liberate
anyone:

> Education isn’t what some people declare it to be, namely, putting
> knowledge into souls that lack it, like putting sight into blind eyes
> . . . Education takes for granted that sight is there but that it
> isn’t turned the right way or where it ought to look, and it tries to
> redirect it appropriately. (518b7-c2, d5-7)

**Endnotes** [1.](#onetext) “Literature and Philosophy: A Conversation
with Bryan Magee” in *Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on
Philosophy and Literature* (New York: Penguin, 1998), 8. Originally
published in Magee, *Men of Ideas* (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1978). [2.](#twotext) Plato, Theaetetus 149a8-9. [3.](#threetext) Plato,
*Republic* 532b6-8, c3-6. What I have dubbed “education” in the brackets
is specifically the study of mathematics, geometry, astronomy, and
harmony. When properly pursued, each discipline involves abstraction
from the senses, and is “really fitted in every way to draw one towards
being” (523a2-3). These disciplines prepare our minds for the most
important discipline, dialectic, Plato’s term for the right kind of
philosophical examination. Hereafter I include citations to the
“Stephanus pages” of the *Republic* in the text. Stephanus pages may be
found along the vertical margins of most translations of the Republic.
For example, “527d6-e3” refers to a passage beginning on Stephanus page
527, section d, on line 6 of the Oxford Classical Text. The translation
I cite here is by Grube/Reeve (1992), which is also found in Cooper
(1997). [4.](#fourtext) I shall refer to the philosophical positions
advocated by the character Socrates as Plato’s, though this scholarly
convention is under attack in some quarters. Plato never appears in the
Republic or any other dialogue (save for the Apology, and he does not
speak there). Thus some scholars find it presumptuous to fob off the
character Socrates’ views onto Plato; would we automatically assume that
Ian Fleming took his martini shaken, not stirred, in the manner of his
fictional agent? Of course, more is at stake in the first case than
getting a drink order wrong, but this is true largely because other
assumptions normally accompany the identification of Socrates’
utterances with Plato’s considered philosophical views. One worry is
that this identification narrows the range of answers we might give to
the question why Plato wrote dialogues. Another worry is that it may
distort our understanding of what Plato took an adequate philosophical
theory to be. [5.](#fivetext) Contemporary readers generally agree with
Socrates. Some refer to “the treacherous analogies and parables” (Cooper
[1977], 143) as “over-ambitious” and “overloaded” (Annas [1981], 265;
252, 256). Much ink has been spilled in the effort to provide a
consistent, plausible philosophical interpretation of the images in the
*Republic*. [6.](#sixtext) I say “speaks to” because the Cave is only
part of a generally sketchy account of the nature of the good. Socrates
disclaims precision, warning us that his talk about the good is
schematic (504d6-8) and fuzzy (cf. 504d8-e3); a shortcut to the truth of
things (cf. 504b1-4; 435d2). Given his lack of knowledge about the good
(505a4-6, 506c2-3, d6-8), the most Socrates can do is provide stories,
not reasoned accounts. This, at least, is the stated rationale for why
he gives “the child and offspring of the good” (507a3-4) rather than a
fully articulated, rationally defensible account. Socrates’ disavowal of
knowledge does not mean that he is completely ignorant. Most obviously,
he knows enough to know that he does not know. He also knows that
knowledge of the good is important to have (505a6-b4), and what method
must be used to get it: dialectic (532a1-d1). Moreover, he provides a
formal account of the good, saying it is the chief or ultimate end to
all our actions (cf.: “Every soul pursues the good and does whatever it
does for its sake” 505d11-e1). And with this premise, he rules out rival
attempts to spell out the formal account, arguing against pleasure and
knowledge as candidates for a substantive account of goodness itself
(505b5-d1). Finally, he seems capable of saying more than he says here,
though we cannot be sure that he takes himself to be able to give
something more secure than images and other “offspring” (cf. 506e1-3).
[7.](#seventext) See 507b5-7. The essence of good things is called,
variously, the good-itself (506d8-e1, 507b5) or form of the good (505a2,
508e2-3). This item is really what reason is attempting to grasp; not
what is good for me, nor what is ‘a good x’, but something that is good
in and of itself. [8.](#eighttext) It is notoriously difficult to count
the population of forms, and we cannot be certain that Plato thought
there was a form of chair. Reeve’s comment (on whether there is a form
in the intelligible world for every group of things in the sensible
world to which a single name applies) is useful for the general question
of how many or what sort of forms there are. “Assumptions are one thing;
truths are another. Thus forms are assumed with ontological abandon, but
the only ones there really are are those needed by dialectical-thought
for its explanatory and reconstructive purposes. Ordinary language is
the first word here, but it is not by any means the last word” (1988,
294). Will there be a last word? According to one commentator writing at
the beginning of the last century, even what Plato meant by the forms
“is a question which has been, and in my opinion will always be, much
debated” (Adam [1902], 169). [9.](#ninetext) The intelligible world is
Plato’s way of referring to the class of things that can be known by the
mind alone and that are imperceptible to the senses. A list would
include mathematical or logical truths and geometrical items, as well as
the vaunted forms. (The types of study that yield knowledge of items in
or aspects of the intelligible world are mentioned in note 3 above.)
[10.](#tentext) “Instead, as he looks at and studies things that are
organized and always the same, that neither do injustice to one another
nor suffer it, being all in rational order, he imitates them and tries
to become as like them as he can. Or do you think that someone can
consort with things he admires without imitating them? . . . Then the
philosopher, by consorting with what is ordered and divine . . . himself
becomes as divine and ordered as a human being can” (500c2-7, c9-d2). On
some ears, this kind of talk encourages mysticism, or the view that the
good-itself has occult qualities. But we do well to remind ourselves
that dialectic is the only route to grasping the good-itself, and that
dialectic is studied only after ten years of mathematics, geometry,
astronomy, and the like (537b-c). Indeed, Cooper has argued that we
think of the good-itself “somehow or other as a perfect example of
rational order, conceived in explicitly mathematical terms” ([1977],
144; see also Kraut [1992]). Again, it is intellectual grasp—not oneness
with or absorption into the good—that we are striving to attain.
[11.](#eleventext)Plato’s *Symposium* famously stresses the fertility of
the philosopher who has grasped the forms (212a-b). [12.](#twelvetext)
For this reason, Plato might appreciate the irony of Morpheus stressing,
again and again, that Neo must see for himself in order to understand.
Plato would regard Neo’s transformed conception of reality partial at
best since Neo is not called upon to regard all sense impressions as
false or diminished, only those that have the wrong source.
[13.](#thirteentext)Annas (1981), 257-59, makes this point when she
compares Plato’s allegory to Bertolucci’s 1970 film, *The Conformist*.
[14.](#fourteentext) In the allegory, the prisoner’s chains are removed
but Socrates is silent on who or what removes them. Here are his words:
“Consider, then, what being released from their bonds and cured of their
ignorance would naturally be like. When one of them was freed and
suddenly compelled to stand up, turn his head, walk, and look up toward
the light, he’d be pain and dazzled and unable to see the things whose
shadows he’d seen before” (515c4-d1). The Cave depicts an astonishingly
thorough imprisonment. Throughout, Plato remarks on the difficulties
that the freed prisoner meets with on the way out of the cave. Given
this detail, it is not unreasonable to expect an account of precisely
what sort of prisoner it is who begins to question whether the cave
contains the whole of reality, or precisely what circumstance prompts
his inquiry. Does the prisoner find the play of shadows internally
inconsistent? Or does one or more of the unbound prisoners decide to
remove the bonds? We are not told. [15.](#fifteentext) Moreover, the
freed prisoner is referred to generically by the indefinite pronoun
“someone” (*tis*); if we wish for specifics, we miss the generality that
Plato intends, for his point surely is that *anyone* could escape the
bonds of ignorance. [16.](#sixteentext) The film surely intends us to
read the figurative sense of this expression alongside the literal one,
and it may be Morpheus’ hope that Neo reflects on the figurative meaning
as well. After all, one of the other messages that appears on his
screen—“knock, knock, Neo”—is consciously riddling. It invites the
question, “who’s there?” [17.](#seventeentext) Although the aim of the
pill is to assist in locating Neo’s body, the suggestion of a
psychoactive effect on him is unmistakable. [18.](#eighteentext) The
Oracle eventually tells Neo “what he needed to hear,” namely that he is
not the One. This inverts the account of Socrates’ oracle as Plato
portrays it in the *Apology*. First, Socrates does not hear the oracle
directly but relies on Chaerephon’s report that “no one is wiser than
Socrates.” Second, Neo’s reluctance to believe that he is not in control
of his actions requires that the Oracle tell him something false. This
Neo is happy to hear, and thus he has no motive for questioning it; it
is eminently believable that he is not their long-awaited savior. By
contrast, Socrates’ oracle tells him something true but whose unlikely
implications must be carefully interpreted through testing and
questioning. **Works Cited / Suggestions for Further Reading** Adam,
James. *The Republic of Plato*. 1902. 2nd Ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1963. Annas, Julia. *An Introduction to Plato’s
Republic*. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1981. Cooper, John M. “The Psychology
of Justice in Plato.” *American Philosophical Quarterly* 14 (1977):
151-57. Cooper, John M, ed. *Plato: Complete Works*. Indianapolis,
Indiana: Hackett Publishing Co., 1997. Grube, G.M.E, trans. *Plato:
Republic*. 2nd Ed. Rev. C.D.C. Reeve. Indianapolis, Indiana: Hackett
Publishing Co., 1992. Kraut, Richard. “The Defense of Justice in Plato’s
Republic.” In *The Cambridge Companion to Plato,* edited by Richard
Kraut. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992, 311-37. Kraut,
Richard, ed. *Plato’s Republic: Critical Essays*. Lanham, Maryland:
Rowman & Littlefield, 1997. Reeve, C.D.C. *Philosopher-Kings: The
Argument of Plato’s Republic*. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1988.
