---
author: admin
date: '2003-04-27 06:23:00'
layout: post
slug: saturday-hikes
status: publish
title: Saturday Hikes
wordpress_id: '1360'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Madeline came over last night (Friday night) to spend the night here. We
have a spare bedroom with a futon here in the house. Her mother filled
me with doom and gloom stories about her having problems with sleepovers
recently and it being a "stage" that she's in. I was told that I might
have to spend the night sleeping next to her or that she might scream in
the middle of the night. Weird crap in my opinion and completely unlike
Madeline normally. As it turned out, it was a load of BS. She slept
through the night just fine. Nary a peep. I even woke up before she did
(or at least got out of bed). When I put her down for sleep, she got out
her little tape deck and was listening to a tape for a while (she often
does this) before sleep. She seemed just fine. Sometimes I wonder
whether my ex-wife makes this shit up... We got up this morning, had a
little breakfast and then went over to Redmond to meet and company for a
short distance day hike. R went and picked up and Autumn's bf, Chuck,
and met us there. The hike turned out to be just past North Bend over at
Twin Falls State Park and was, I am told, about three miles or so.
That's three miles of up and down a ridge with some creeks and a decent
sized waterfall with a wood bridge over it. It was reletively pleasent,
death march comparisons notwithstanding. Madeline didn't have any
problems with it and said that she had a good time but did say that she
didn't want to do it again. heh. Too much walking. I took her home, R
and I did some grocery shopping and a Half Price Books visit, and then
we came home and watched both halves of the **Helen of Troy** miniseries
thing from a week or so ago. That was decently done though they took
some liberties with the traditional Illiad story. It was better than
most USA Network things that I've seen. I won't sing its praises but it
was probably worth watching once. You gotta wonder about the standards
of tv these days though. Let me see, lots of murder, death, child
slaying (without being graphic but being clear), full nudity from behind
and a fairly explicit rape scene. Well then! Tomorrow I'll be going to
the OTO's Gnostic Mass and maybe trying to catch up on some reading. I'm
working through **Broken Angles**, the sequel to **Altered Carbon,** one
of the current hits in the Science Fiction book market. I'm also working
my way through Samuel Geoffrey's **Civilized Shamans**, which is his
Anthropological work on Tibetan religion and culture (mostly the former)
and R.J. Stewart's recent qabalah book. I should probably do some Latin
flash card studying too. My vocabulary is still a bit week from my being
gone so long. I did survive the second day of the Leads Offsite. I may
kill if I have to do any break out groups again soon.
