--- 
layout: post
title: Athens
published: true
meta: 
  ljID: "2231"
tags: 
- Daily Life
type: post
status: publish
---
Athens doesn&apos;t have quite the easy Internet access that a lot of the places we have been in have had and we&apos;ve been busy so I haven&apos;t been online in a couple of days.

We come back tomorrow morning our time and I&apos;ll post more on the day off that I have following my return.

But, in brief, we arrived in Athens on Saturday afternoon (it&apos;s Monday evening now). We accidentally got off the highway and had to negotiate Athenian traffic through the city. I am not exaggerating (really) when I say that it is the nastiest, scariest, most dangerous mess that I have ever seen. You really do take your life in your own hands on the road here and R was stuck driving in it.

Eventually, we dropped off the car at the airport, called Rachel, R&apos;s friend who works at the Embassy, and came into town to meet her. Rachel told us that we could spend the night at her place the other day so we crashed there, hung out a while and then went out for a night on the town. Greek Nightlife on Saturday seems to start around 11:00 pm and go to about 5:00 am. We crashed early but we did get dinner at a Thai place and then go out for drinks with some of Rachel&apos;s friends.

Yesterday, Sunday, we went to the Acropolis and the surrounding ruins. That was nice as well. In the evening, we hung out with Rachel, watched <b>American Beauty</b> on her DVD Player (oh! Wow! English tv!!) and generally chilled out. We&apos;d done a little shopping after the Acropolis along with lunch.

Today, we went to a private museum called the "Benaki Museum" which has a fine collection of Greek artifacts and then we went to the Plaka to go shopping. We&apos;ll be taking Rachel out to dinner soon because she was nice enough to let us crash in her spare bedroom for the three nights that we are here and then, in the morning, we come home to Seattle. By 7:00 pm Tuesday local, we should be home. See you then.
