---
author: admin
date: '2003-06-07 19:14:00'
layout: post
slug: on-natural-building
status: publish
title: On Natural Building...
wordpress_id: '1594'
categories:
- Society
- Technology
---
I still want to build a cob house and perhaps retreat place on some property...with buying a house, it probably won't be soon though...<lj-cut text="read an old article..."></lj-cut>
<h2>Building with Nature, Earth, and Magic</h2>
<h4>by Gregg Marchese</h4>
<font size="+2">I</font> <font size="-2">T'S A SCENE RIGHT OUT OF TOLKIEN. ELVES</font> and gnomes must have came out of the mist to create these dwellings--curved cottages of tree poles and cedar shakes, sculpted earthen walls, convoluted stone foundations. Roofs curve and soar like fronds or bird wings; some are topped by grass or moss.

They rise like mushrooms in a 12-acre meadow on a ridge in northwest Washington, surrounded by a fir and cedar forest that looks west across the Skagit River Valley to Puget Sound and the Olympic Mountains beyond. Amidst conifers, apple orchards, berry patches, and vegetable gardens, the structures in this Ecotopian fantasy world were not built by elves and dwarves at all, but by SunRay Kelley and various crews of volunteers and apprentices over the years. SunRay has lived on this land all his life, as has his father and grandfather before him. He, his wife Judy, and three teenagers form this small community, along with two other couples, a single man, two part-time apprentices, and some new folks starting up a yoga retreat and bed and breakfast. SunRay's School of Natural Living is also here, where he conducts workshops on the art of natural building.

"Natural building is a matter of focusing," says SunRay. "We concentrate our energy on the task at hand--creating a home. We use the skill of envisioning, which is seeing the structure in our minds, commonly called `design.' We break the mold of square boxes and are free to imagine, using nature--both the world around us and our own inner nature--as a model for unique, livable, and living homes that express our own souls and the soul of nature. We use the skill of creating, which means taking that vision and making it a solid reality in the physical world, commonly called `building.' There's more to natural building than swinging a hammer," he grins, "though we do that too."

It began 23 years ago, with SunRay's first building, the Earth House: two stories of open floor plan below and a cathedral loft above, with two bedrooms like wings on either side and two attached greenhouses. The roof fans out from a high point and sweeps down in a smooth arc on all sides to short vertical walls,plastered outside with stucco and lined inside with cedar. All the timber framing was done with round, unmilled logs collected from windfalls in the forest. The roof/walls are of split cedar shakes, now growing a beard of rich, green moss. Earth House is abundant with artistic touches: a carved wooden door, stained glass throughout, a goddess-shaped carved soapstone fireplace, and cast bronze hands lovingly holding up the rafters.

"I learned a lot from my first home," SunRay says. "Now I'd use more insulation, and better protect the wood in the greenhouse from rot. And I'd put the kitchen in the southeast instead of the northwest, for more lighting."

"These days I like strawbale, cob, and living roofs," he adds, "though I still love working with wood. Here in the Pacific Northwest we have some of the greatest building materials on Earth. The beautiful cedar, fir, and other woods are a blessing for our creating. We gratefully take from the forest what it offers, because I believe that the spirit of the wood wants to be taken by human hands and shaped into something new. It wants to be used so it can in a sense live again as beautiful and functioning parts of our homes or as sculpture. That's how we honor the wood and the forest."

Subsequent buildings include the four-story Sky House with its radiant floor woodshop and greenhouse, and a round yoga studio. The latter was constructed of 16 modular wall and roof panels pre-built in the shop, and features an embedded wood timber-framed and earth-sculpted, definitely feminine entryway, with diamond-shaped windows and pink plastered walls with mica flakes that sparkle in the light. The latest building project is a round timber-frame structure with a stone foundation, strawbale walls, and a "living" sod roof.

Costs for these buildings are hard to figure. Some of the materials - especially wood and clay - come from the site, while most of the labor has been provided by volunteers or workshop participants. A boom truck, dump truck, tractor, and power tools are already on site. There has also been some bartering for labor and materials. In natural building, materials are usually cheaper than in conventional building; however, projects may require more, or less, labor, depending on the material and the workers' skills. But labor generally requires fewer technical skills and tools.

Timber framing - the core of many structures here - is an ancient technique, native to Europe and Asia alike, for joining wood poles in the round, with logs not milled into dimensional lumber. Timber framing uses wood that is too small in diameter for saw logs, but which is strong and beautiful when used as round posts and beams. Joints are made by cutting saddle-shaped notches in upright posts, in which joists and rafters are laid, or by carving holes in the underside of ridge beams where posts can be inserted. Gravity holds timber framing all together. Often ridge beams are curved to give the roof and overall house an organic shape; this beautifully utilizes curved logs usually considered worthless for milling.

Here all buildings exhibit an awareness of the four elements, in terms of their proportion, placement, and joining. Earth is honored with stone, mud, wood and straw; fire with fireplaces made of cob or soapstone or conventional brick. These use the Rumford design, with a shallow but tall fire area, where logs burn vertically and their heat is thrown back into the room. Water is present with radiant floor heating, with tubing set in concrete slabs or earthen floors of poured adobe. Air enters through porous strawbale and earthen walls that act as passive air-exchangers, warming fresh outside air in the winter and cooling it in the summer. Porous earthen plasters without concrete stucco are used in these
buildings so the walls can still "breathe." (Regrettably most codes for strawbale require concrete on the exterior, though the substitution of lime,
gypsum, wheat paste, horse manure, cactus juice, or even Elmer's Glue can make non-concrete earthen plasters quite durable against weather.)

Nature is ever the model. Rocks stay close to the ground, trees soar upright and branch out, floors are of earth, walls are of straw with earth plaster. Whenever possible elements are arranged as they are in nature - although sometimes rules are broken and the trickster emerges, such as an upside-down tree, its rootball whimsically poking up in the air.

Roofs can also be created in more healthy, beautiful, and sustainable ways than conventional metal roofs or asphalt shingles. The latest technique used here is a living roof that can grow grasses, wildflowers, or ground cover such as strawberries. After the framing was up and the rafters on, rough-cut 14" cedar planks were overlapped across the rafters. As the roof is curved and hollowed, these planks were able to bend and follow the curves easily. Then Torchdown, a rubbery sheeting coated on one side with a tar-like substance, was laid on. The tar was heated with a propane torch until gooey, then stuck to the planks. Other Torchdown sheets were overlapped until a waterproof membrane covered the entire roof. Then a grow medium of sod was thrown over the Torchdown. (Straw, soil, or wood chips can also be used.) Throw in grass, herb, or wildflower seeds. Just add rain, and watch it grow. A living roof like this provides insulation, natural beauty--and no loss of green growing area! Torchdown, the only non-organic material, costs $40 for a 39" x 33' roll, and covers 100 square feet. It's tear-proof, waterproof, and all but eternal when covered with earth.

One of the best natural materials, and one regaining popularity in alternative building circles, is cob - an earthen mix of sand, clay, soil, straw, and water. These materials are combined on a tarp in optimum ratios depending on the desired use and quality of the soils on site. The materials are mixed by walking on them and blending them together until uniform. Then they are laid wet upon a stone or rubble foundation and built up slowly and methodically to form a monolithic wall. Cob can be sculpted into curves, set with bottles, or decorated with rocks and shells. It is durable when raised off the ground above the splash zone, overhung with ample eaves, and plastered on the exterior. Cob's great earthen mass keeps houses warm in winter and cool in summer. Its amazing acoustical qualities produce a soft, hushed interior. Cob is healthy to live in,
dirt cheap, and a joy to behold. No wonder people around the world have been using cob for millennia.

Light is an important aspect of natural building, especially in the cloudy Northwest. All the houses here take advantage of southern exposures with windows or attached greenhouses. The glazing reveals beautiful views and keeps a connection with nature even indoors, helping occupants feel part of the landscape. Nature is invited in, enticing the residents outside.

This community values beautiful, healthy, natural structures that people feel good about building and living in. The stone, soil, trees, and straw in these buildings have used little energy in their processing, packaging, shipping, or production, and will return to the Earth without landfilling or causing pollution. Many are alternatives to products from a lumber industry that is destroying our forests and causing numerous problems with surface water, wildlife, air quality, and global warming. Straw is often burned as an agricultural waste, contributing to the greenhouse effect. However, as a building material straw is cheap, quick and easy to install, provides R-40 to R-50 insulation value, and, as it "breathes," allows good indoor air quality. Earth, the most common building material in the world, is cheap, healthy, durable, benign, and can be sculpted into beautiful shapes. And these materials contribute no harmful chemical contaminants to indoor air. But the most sacred aspect of buildings of these materials is how well and healthy the people feel who work and play within them--the heart of creating with nature.

Human beings are here to perceive the beauty of the natural world, and then express it through their hands, hearts, and minds. Our buildings can be works of art that blend in with and enhance the natural world, sheltering us as natural beings in a living world.

"The Earth is not dirty," SunRay often says, grinning through his typical end-of-day mask of dirt, hair tangled with straw, hands waving emphatically in mud-coated gestures. He must be some kind of magical creature ... an elf, dwarf, or gnome. Perhaps such an Earth-loving, home-building creature lives in every one of us, just waiting to come out.

<font size="-1"><a title="author" name="author"></a>Gregg Marchese has served as an intern at the School of Natural Living.</font>
