--- 
wordpress_id: 1874
layout: post
title: Work Dinner
date: 2003-08-29 05:17:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/2003/08/29/work-dinner/
---
Last night I had a mandatory after-work work dinner. My boss wanted to talk with those of us who will be reporting to him in our new organization so he scheduled a two hour meeting post-work. The only plus is that we went to a fairly nice restaurant and work picked up the tab. I had a nice steak. I generally don&apos;t care for things that cause my work to spill into my personal time. In many ways, it&apos;s bad enough that I have to work full time for "the Man" as it is without it also getting in the way of doing things like going to Brandy&apos;s sex magick class or the like. Luckily, my boss generally does understand these things. He&apos;s been working 12 to 14 hours a day for the last month or so because of all of the shit going down and the upcoming reorg. It&apos;s hard to bitch too much about a work dinner when you know your boss and others at the table were at meetings on Saturday and he was home working on our performance reviews on Sunday. It&apos;s just not the life that I want though. I&apos;ve worked for him for two years now. Every now and then, he asks me when I&apos;m going to become a test manager or what we need to do towards that end. I&apos;ve explained to him that if being a test manager means working 12 or more hours a day, six days a week, why the hell would I do it? I know the pay wouldn&apos;t go up that dramatically at all. Other than that, I&apos;m pondering whether I want to do the two years MA in Buddhist Studies with Naropa or not. It isn&apos;t completely ideal (I&apos;d prefer to do a History MA locally but they have no evening program) but I could do it while working if I wanted to do so. I&apos;d probably still take a student loan out for a chunk of it because it&apos;s probably about $8K - $10K a year for the program. As long as I keep working, I should be able to pay it off if I do it. I&apos;m also getting to the point with a lot of the Tibetan Buddhist stuff that I think six or eight weeks of a Tibetan class so I could at least read the alphabet and know basic pronunciation rules would be helpful.