---
author: admin
date: '2003-06-23 19:42:00'
layout: post
slug: rainman
status: publish
title: Rainman
wordpress_id: '1617'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

**Savant for a Day** *By LAWRENCE OSBORNE*
[http://www.nytimes.com/2003/06/22/magazine/22SAVANT.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2003/06/22/magazine/22SAVANT.html)
In a concrete basement at the University of Sydney, I sat in a chair
waiting to have my brain altered by an electromagnetic pulse. My
forehead was connected, by a series of electrodes, to a machine that
looked something like an old-fashioned beauty-salon hair dryer and was
sunnily described to me as a ''Danish-made transcranial magnetic
stimulator.'' This was not just any old Danish-made transcranial
magnetic stimulator, however; this was the Medtronic Mag Pro, and it was
being operated by Allan Snyder, one of the world's most remarkable
scientists of human cognition. Nonetheless, the anticipation of
electricity being beamed into my frontal lobes (and the consent form I
had just signed) made me a bit nervous. Snyder found that amusing. ''Oh,
relax now!'' he said in the thick local accent he has acquired since
moving here from America. ''I've done it on myself a hundred times. This
is Australia. Legally, it's far more difficult to damage people in
Australia than it is in the United States.'' ''Damage?'' I groaned.
''You're not going to be damaged,'' he said. ''You're going to be
enhanced.'' The Medtronic was originally developed as a tool for brain
surgery: by stimulating or slowing down specific regions of the brain,
it allowed doctors to monitor the effects of surgery in real time. But
it also produced, they noted, strange and unexpected effects on
patients' mental functions: one minute they would lose the ability to
speak, another minute they would speak easily but would make odd
linguistic errors and so on. A number of researchers started to look
into the possibilities, but one in particular intrigued Snyder: that
people undergoing transcranial magnetic stimulation, or TMS, could
suddenly exhibit savant intelligence -- those isolated pockets of
geniuslike mental ability that most often appear in autistic people.
Snyder is an impish presence, the very opposite of a venerable
professor, let alone an internationally acclaimed scientist. There is a
whiff of Woody Allen about him. Did I really want him, I couldn't help
thinking, rewiring my hard drive? ''We're not changing your brain
physically,'' he assured me. ''You'll only experience differences in
your thought processes while you're actually on the machine.'' His
assistant made a few final adjustments to the electrodes, and then, as
everyone stood back, Snyder flicked the switch. A series of
electromagnetic pulses were being directed into my frontal lobes, but I
felt nothing. Snyder instructed me to draw something. ''What would you
like to draw?'' he said merrily. ''A cat? You like drawing cats? Cats it
is.'' I've seen a million cats in my life, so when I close my eyes, I
have no trouble picturing them. But what does a cat really look like,
and how do you put it down on paper? I gave it a try but came up with
some sort of stick figure, perhaps an insect. While I drew, Snyder
continued his lecture. ''You could call this a creativity-amplifying
machine. It's a way of altering our states of mind without taking drugs
like mescaline. You can make people see the raw data of the world as it
is. As it is actually represented in the unconscious mind of all of
us.'' Two minutes after I started the first drawing, I was instructed to
try again. After another two minutes, I tried a third cat, and then in
due course a fourth. Then the experiment was over, and the electrodes
were removed. I looked down at my work. The first felines were boxy and
stiffly unconvincing. But after I had been subjected to about 10 minutes
of transcranial magnetic stimulation, their tails had grown more
vibrant, more nervous; their faces were personable and convincing. They
were even beginning to wear clever expressions. I could hardly recognize
them as my own drawings, though I had watched myself render each one, in
all its loving detail. Somehow over the course of a very few minutes,
and with no additional instruction, I had gone from an incompetent
draftsman to a very impressive artist of the feline form. Snyder looked
over my shoulder. ''Well, how about that? Leonardo would be envious.''
Or turning in his grave, I thought. As remarkable as the cat-drawing
lesson was, it was just a hint of Snyder's work and its implications for
the study of cognition. He has used TMS dozens of times on university
students, measuring its effect on their ability to draw, to proofread
and to perform difficult mathematical functions like identifying prime
numbers by sight. Hooked up to the machine, 40 percent of test subjects
exhibited extraordinary, and newfound, mental skills. That Snyder was
able to induce these remarkable feats in a controlled, repeatable
experiment is more than just a great party trick; it's a breakthrough
that may lead to a revolution in the way we understand the limits of our
own intelligence -- and the functioning of the human brain in general.
Snyder's work began with a curiosity about autism. Though there is
little consensus about what causes this baffling -- and increasingly
common -- disorder, it seems safe to say that autistic people share
certain qualities: they tend to be rigid, mechanical and emotionally
dissociated. They manifest what autism's great ''discoverer,'' Leo
Kanner, called ''an anxiously obsessive desire for the preservation of
sameness.'' And they tend to interpret information in a hyperliteral
way, using ''a kind of language which does not seem intended to serve
interpersonal communication.'' For example, Snyder says, when autistic
test subjects came to see him at the university, they would often get
lost in the main quad. They might have been there 10 times before, but
each time the shadows were in slightly different positions, and the
difference overwhelmed their sense of place. ''They can't grasp a
general concept equivalent to the word 'quad,''' he explains. ''If it
changes appearance even slightly, then they have to start all over
again.'' Despite these limitations, a small subset of autistics, known
as savants, can also perform superspecialized mental feats. Perhaps the
most famous savant was Dustin Hoffman's character in ''Rain Man,'' who
could count hundreds of matchsticks at a glance. But the truth has often
been even stranger: one celebrated savant in turn-of-the-century Vienna
could calculate the day of the week for every date since the birth of
Christ. Other savants can speak dozens of languages without formally
studying any of them or can reproduce music at the piano after only a
single hearing. A savant studied by the English doctor J. Langdon Down
in 1887 had memorized every page of Gibbon's ''Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire.'' At the beginning of the 19th century, the splendidly
named Gottfried Mind became famous all over Europe for the amazing
pictures he drew of cats. The conventional wisdom has long been that
autistics' hyperliteral thought processes were completely separate from
the more contextual, nuanced, social way that most adults think, a
different mental function altogether. And so, by extension, the
extraordinary skills of autistic savants have been regarded as flukes,
almost inhuman feats that average minds could never achieve. Snyder
argues that all those assumptions -- about everything from the way
autistic savants behave down to the basic brain functions that cause
them to do so -- are mistaken. Autistic thought isn't wholly
incompatible with ordinary thought, he says; it's just a variation on
it, a more extreme example. He first got the idea after reading ''The
Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat,'' in which Oliver Sacks explores the
link between autism and a very specific kind of brain damage. If
neurological impairment is the cause of the autistic's disabilities,
Snyder wondered, could it be the cause of their geniuslike abilities,
too? By shutting down certain mental functions -- the capacity to think
conceptually, categorically, contextually -- did this impairment allow
other mental functions to flourish? Could brain damage, in short,
actually make you brilliant? In a 1999 paper called ''Is Integer
Arithmetic Fundamental to Mental Processing? The Mind's Secret
Arithmetic,'' Snyder and D. John Mitchell considered the example of an
autistic infant, whose mind ''is not concept driven. . . . In our view
such a mind can tap into lower level details not readily available to
introspection by normal individuals.'' These children, they wrote, seem
''to be aware of information in some raw or interim state prior to it
being formed into the 'ultimate picture.''' Most astonishing, they went
on, ''the mental machinery for performing lightning fast integer
arithmetic calculations could be within us all.'' And so Snyder turned
to TMS, in an attempt, as he says, ''to enhance the brain by shutting
off certain parts of it.'' ''In a way, savants are the great enigma of
today's neurology,'' says Prof. Joy Hirsch, director of the Functional
M.R.I. Research Center at Columbia University. ''They exist in all
cultures and are a distinct type. Why? How? We don't know. Yet
understanding the savant will help provide insight into the whole
neurophysiological underpinning of human behavior. That's why Snyder's
ideas are so exciting -- he's asking a really fundamental question,
which no one has yet answered.'' If Snyder's suspicions are correct, in
fact, and savants have not more brainpower than the rest of us, but
less, then it's even possible that everybody starts out life as a
savant. Look, for example, at the ease with which children master
complex languages -- a mysterious skill that seems to shut off
automatically around the age of 12. ''What we're doing is
counterintuitive,'' Snyder tells me. ''We're saying that all these
genius skills are easy, they're natural. Our brain does them naturally.
Like walking. Do you know how difficult walking is? It's much more
difficult than drawing!'' To prove his point, he hooks me up to the
Medtronic Mag Pro again and asks me to read the following lines: A bird
in the hand is worth two in the the bush ''A bird in the hand is worth
two in the bush,'' I say. ''Again,'' Snyder says, and smiles. So once
more: ''A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.'' He makes me
repeat it five or six times, slowing me down until he has me reading
each word with aching slowness. Then he switches on the machine. He is
trying to suppress those parts of my brain responsible for thinking
contextually, for making connections. Without them, I will be able to
see things more as an autistic might. After five minutes of electric
pulses, I read the card again. Only then do I see -- instantly -- that
the card contains an extra ''the.'' On my own, I had been looking for
patterns, trying to coax the words on the page into a coherent, familiar
whole. But ''on the machine,'' he says, ''you start seeing what's
actually there, not what you think is there.'' Snyder's theories are
bolstered by the documented cases in which sudden brain damage has
produced savant abilities almost overnight. He cites the case of Orlando
Serrell, a 10-year-old street kid who was hit on the head and
immediately began doing calendrical calculations of baffling complexity.
Snyder argues that we all have Serrell's powers. ''We remember virtually
everything, but we recall very little,'' Snyder explains. ''Now isn't
that strange? Everything is in there'' -- he taps the side of his head.
''Buried deep in all our brains are phenomenal abilities, which we lose
for some reason as we develop into 'normal' conceptual creatures. But
what if we could reawaken them?'' Not all of Snyder's colleagues agree
with his theories. Michael Howe, an eminent psychologist at the
University of Exeter in Britain who died last year, argued that
savantism (and genius itself) was largely a result of incessant practice
and specialization. ''The main difference between experts and savants,''
he once told New Scientist magazine, ''is that savants do things which
most of us couldn't be bothered to get good at.'' Robert Hendren,
executive director of the M.I.N.D. Institute at the University of
California at Davis, brought that concept down to my level: ''If you
drew 20 cats one after the other, they'd probably get better anyway.''
Like most neuroscientists, he doubts that an electromagnetic pulse can
stimulate the brain into creativity: ''I'm not sure I see how TMS can
actually alter the way your brain works. There's a chance that Snyder is
right. But it's still very experimental.'' Tomas Paus, an associate
professor of neuroscience at McGill University, who has done extensive
TMS research, is even more dubious. ''I don't believe TMS can ever
elicit complex behavior,'' he says. But even skeptics like Hendren and
Paus concede that by intensifying the neural activity of one part of the
brain while slowing or shutting down others, TMS can have remarkable
effects. One of its most successful applications has been in the realm
of psychiatry, where it is now used to dispel the ''inner voices'' of
schizophrenics, or to combat clinical depression without the damaging
side effects of electroshock therapy. (NeuroNetics, an Atlanta company,
is developing a TMS machine designed for just this purpose, which will
probably be released in 2006, pending F.D.A. approval.) Meanwhile,
researchers at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke found that TMS applied to the prefrontal cortex enabled subjects
to solve geometric puzzles much more rapidly. Alvaro Pascual-Leone,
associate professor of neurology at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center in Boston (who, through his work at the Laboratory for Magnetic
Brain Stimulation, has been one of the American visionaries of TMS), has
even suggested that TMS could be used to ''prep'' students' minds before
lessons. None of this has gone unnoticed by canny entrepreneurs and
visionary scientists. Last year, the Brain Stimulation Laboratory at the
Medical University of South Carolina received a $2 million government
grant to develop a smaller TMS device that sleep-deprived soldiers could
wear to keep them alert. ''It's not 'Star Trek' at all,'' says Ziad
Nahas, the laboratory's medical director. ''We've done a lot of the
science on reversing cognitive deficiencies in people with insomnia and
sleep deficiencies. It works.'' If so, it could be a small leap to the
day it boosts soldiers' cognitive functioning under normal
circumstances. And from there, how long before Americans are walking
around with humming antidepression helmets and math-enhancing ''hair
dryers'' on their heads? Will commercially available TMS machines be
used to turn prosaic bank managers into amateur Rembrandts? Snyder has
even contemplated video games that harness specialized parts of the
brain that are otherwise inaccessible. ''Anything is possible,'' says
Prof. Vilayanur Ramachandran, director of the Center for Brain and
Cognition at the University of California at San Diego and the noted
author of ''Phantoms in the Brain.'' Snyder's theories have not been
proved, he allows, but they are brilliantly suggestive: ''We're at the
same stage in brain research that biology was in the 19th century. We
know almost nothing about the mind. Snyder's theories may sound like
'The X-Files,' but what he's saying is completely plausible. Up to a
point the brain is open, malleable and constantly changing. We might
well be able to make it run in new ways.'' Of those who dismiss Snyder's
theories out of hand, he shrugs: ''People are often blind to new ideas.
Especially scientists.'' Bruce L. Miller, the A.W. and Mary Margaret
Claussen distinguished professor in neurology at the University of
California at San Francisco, is intrigued by Snyder's experiments and
his attempts to understand the physiological basis of cognition. But he
points out that certain profound questions about artificially altered
intelligence have not yet been answered. ''Do we really want these
abilities?'' he asks. ''Wouldn't it change my idea of myself if I could
suddenly paint amazing pictures?'' It probably would change people's
ideas of themselves, to say nothing of their ideas of artistic talent.
And though that prospect might discomfort Miller, there are no doubt
others whom it would thrill. But could anyone really guess, in advance,
how their lives might be affected by instant creativity, instant
intelligence, instant happiness? Or by their disappearance, just as
instantly, once the TMS is switched off? As he walked me out of the
university -- a place so Gothic that it could be Oxford, but for the
intensely flowering jacaranda in one corner and the strange Southern
Hemisphere birds flitting about -- and toward the freeway back to
downtown Sydney, Snyder for his part radiated the most convincingly
ebullient optimism. ''Remember that old saw which says that we only use
a small part our brain? Well, it might just be true. Except that now we
can actually prove it physically and experimentally. That has to be
significant. I mean, it has to be, doesn't it?'' We stopped for a moment
by the side of the roaring traffic and looked up at a haze in the sky.
Snyder's eyes contracted inquisitively as he pieced together the
unfamiliar facts (brown smoke, just outside Sydney) and eased them into
a familiar narrative framework (the forest fires that had been raging
all week). It was an effortless little bit of deductive, nonliteral
thinking -- the sort of thing that human beings, unaided by TMS, do a
thousand times a day. Then, in an instant, he switched back to our
conversation and picked up his train of thought. ''More important than
that, we can change our own intelligence in unexpected ways. Why would
we not want to explore that?''
