---
author: admin
date: '2003-09-19 14:33:00'
layout: post
slug: greek-numbers
status: publish
title: Greek Numbers
wordpress_id: '1890'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

*(via )*
[http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3109806.stm](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3109806.stm)
![image](http://newsimg.bbc.co.uk/media/images/39339000/gif/_39339094_greek_203.gif)**Greeks
'borrowed Egyptian numbers'** By Paul Rincon BBC Science **The
astronomers, physicists and mathematicians of ancient Greece were true
innovators.** But one thing it seems the ancient Greeks did not invent
was the counting system on which many of their greatest thinkers based
their pioneering calculations. New research suggests the Greeks borrowed
their system known as alphabetic numerals from the Egyptians, and did
not develop it themselves as was long believed. Greek alphabetic
numerals were favoured by the mathematician and physicist Archimedes,
the scientific philosopher Aristotle and the mathematician Euclid,
amongst others. **Trade explosion** An analysis by Dr Stephen
Chrisomalis of McGill University in Montreal, Canada, showed striking
similarities between Greek alphabetic numerals and Egyptian demotic
numerals, used in Egypt from the late 8th Century BC until around AD
450. Both systems use nine signs in each "base" so that individual units
are counted 1-9, tens are counted 10-90 and so on. Both systems also
lack a symbol for zero. Dr Chrisomalis proposes that an explosion in
trade between Greece and Egypt after 600 BC led to the system being
adopted by the Greeks. Greek merchants may have seen the demotic system
in use in Egypt and adapted it for their own purposes. "We know there
was an enormous amount of contact between the Greeks and Egyptians at
this time," Dr Chrisomalis told BBC News Online. **'Plausible' theory**
Professor David Joyce, a mathematician at Clark University in Worcester,
US, said he had not examined Dr Chrisomalis' research, but thought the
link was plausible. "Egyptians used hieratic and, later, demotic script
where the multiple symbols looked more like single symbols," said
Professor Joyce. "Instead of seven vertical strokes, a particular
squiggle was used. That's the same scheme used in the Greek alphabetic
numerals." Traditionally, the system is thought to have been developed
by Greeks in western Asia Minor, in modern day Turkey. Between 475 BC
and 325 BC, alphabetic numerals fell out of use in favour of a system of
written numbers known as acrophonic numerals. But from the late 4th
Century BC onwards, alphabetic numerals became the preferred system
throughout the Greek-speaking world. They were used until the fall of
the Byzantine Empire in the 15th Century. The research is to be
published in the journal Antiquity.
