---
author: admin
date: '2003-07-09 16:44:00'
layout: post
slug: ouch-2
status: publish
title: Ouch!
wordpress_id: '1631'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

From [the
Telegraph](http://www.news.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/main.jhtml?xml=/opinion/2003/07/06/dl0602.xml&sSheet=/opinion/2003/07/06/ixoplead.html):
**Tongue-fried** (Filed: 06/07/2003) The experience of Miss Becky Nyang,
who almost died last week when a lightning-bolt struck her metal
tongue-stud, should act as a salutary lesson to us all. Miss Nyang, an
airport worker from Reading, was unfortunate enough to be caught up in
an electrical storm while holidaying in Corfu. Her tongue-stud acted as
a conductor, briefly subjecting her to an estimated temperature of
15,000ºC, and rendering her mute for three days. Tongue-studs have
become de rigueur among fashionable young people: even Zara Phillips,
the Princess Royal's daughter, has been photographed sporting one. Yet
such is the current craze for piercings that a mere tongue-stud no
longer has the power to raise many eyebrows. Indeed, many of the
customers flocking to body-piercing parlours - a service now offered
even in Selfridges department store - have been requesting more outre
piercings in areas not commonly revealed in polite society. Once,
concerned parents sought to deter their rebellious offspring with the
warning of infections resulting from piercings. Now they can brandish
the prospect of a lightning-bolt. And, with the proliferation of pierced
sites on the body, the potential for agony only increases: one strike in
the wrong place could prove a more electrifying experience than even
poor Miss Nyang endured.
