---
author: admin
date: '2003-10-01 03:18:00'
layout: post
slug: '202535'
status: publish
title: '202535'
wordpress_id: '1903'
categories:
- Academic
---

I'm still considering doing this program... I'd be happy to find a
history, religious studies or philosophy related program as well but
distance learning options are limited. Naropa is a fairly well regarded
school, especially for Buddhist work.
[http://www.naropa.edu/mabuddhiststudies/index.html](http://www.naropa.edu/mabuddhiststudies/index.html)
**Launching Summer 2004** The Master of Arts low-residency degree in
Buddhist Studies spans two years and involves the broad, in-depth study
of Buddhism as a spiritual, theological, and cultural tradition. Course
work emphasizes Indian and Tibetan Buddhism. The approach of this
program is non-sectarian, scholarly, and critical, relying on the best
of contemporary Western and traditional Buddhist scholarship. At the
same time, the program is also informed and nourished by studentsâ€™
"hands-on" exploration of the major Buddhist meditative traditions. Our
study of Buddhism is carried out within a context of respect for the
tradition and appreciation for its humane values and profound spiritual
perspectives. Core Buddhism courses examine the histories, cultural
contexts, and institutions of Buddhism from the origins and early
development through its Indian roots and its transmission to Tibet.
Attention is paid not only to Buddhist theory, but to practice. The
genres studied include sutras, commentaries, independent treatises,
yogic songs, and biographies. Emphasis is placed on methods of
interpretation and translation issues for the western student. Buddhist
meditation is taught in a non-sectarian, practical manner. This
low-residency 36 credit MA in Buddhist Studies takes two years and a
summer to complete. The program consists of four online semesters with
two 3-credit courses offered each semester and three summer onsite
components. The program is finalized with an MA culminating project. The
Curriculum consists of four online semesters and three summer resident
components:

-   ***Summer Residency 1st Year***
    -   Introduction to Buddhism
    -   Meditation and Community

-   ***1st Year Fall Online***
    -   Buddhist Teachings on Mind and Emotions: The Abhidharma
        Tradition
    -   Meditation Practicum I

-   ***1st Year Spring Online***
    -   The Second Turning of the Wheel of Dharma
    -   Meditation Practicum II

-   ***Summer Community Component 2nd Year***
    -   Contemporary Buddhism
    -   Dathun or equivalent

-   ***2nd Year Fall Online***
    -   Madhyamaka
    -   Buddhism: The Way of Wisdom and Compassion

-   ***2nd Year Spring Online***
    -   Buddha Nature
    -   The Living Spirituality of Tibetan Buddhism

-   ***Summer Residency 3rd Year***
    -   Maitri
    -   Meditation and Community II
    -   M.A. Culminating Project


