--- 
layout: post
title: Genesis?
published: true
meta: 
  ljID: "2851"
  no_lj: "1"
  _podPressPostSpecific: a:6:{s:15:"itunes:subtitle";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:14:"itunes:summary";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:15:"itunes:keywords";s:17:"##WordPressCats##";s:13:"itunes:author";s:10:"##Global##";s:15:"itunes:explicit";s:7:"Default";s:12:"itunes:block";s:7:"Default";}
tags: 
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
type: post
status: publish
---
A little rewrite of Genesis that someone on the Horus-Maat Lodge list did:

I am Atum, the creator of the Eldest Gods,
I am that great He-She,
I am he who did what seemed good to him,
I took my space in the place of my will,
Mine is the space of those who move along
like those two serpentine circles.

In the beginning Atum created Nuit and Hadit. The earth was without form and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. The Khabs of Atum moved upon the face of the Nun. Atum invoked Djehuti and said "Let there be Ma'at" and there was Light. And Atum saw that the Light was good and he separated the light from the Darkness. Djehuti called the Light "Ma'at", the Darkness he called "Seti". Ma'at came, and Seti came, it was the first day.

Djehuti said, "Let there be a firmament within the Created Abyss, to separate the Xaoz from the Xaoz". So Atum made the firmament, and separated the Xaoz under the firmament from the Xaoz above it and divided them eight ways and so it was; and Djehuti called the firmament Nuit and of the Xaoz he called the Ogdoad. Nuit came, and the Ogdoad came, the second day.

Djehuti said "Let the Xaoz under Nuit be gathered into one place, so that dry land may appear"; and so it was. Djehuti called the center of the earth Hadit, the dry land earth, and the gathering of the Water he called sea; and Atum saw that it was good. Evening came and morning came, the third day.

Djehuti said "let there be lights within Nuit to separate Ma'at and Seti". Atum created Ra and Ubasti, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night. He made the stars also. And Atum saw that it was good. Such lights govern day and night and separate Ma'at and Seti. Ubasti came, and the Ra came, the forth day.

Djehuti said "let Nuit teem with astral creatures and let them fly above the ground across Nuit". Atum created all of the astral which inhabits the earth, the sea, the air and the cosmos. The Demon Lady Djehuti called Sehkmet and the Man Angel he called Heru. Sehkmet came, Heru came, the fifth day.

Djehuti said "let the ground bring forth living creatures, according to their various kinds". Thus the Sky and the Ground and the Air in-between them were subdued by living creatures. Evening came, the morning came, the sixth day.

Djehuti blessed the seventh day as a holy day of rest.
