--- 
wordpress_id: 1893
layout: post
title: Saturday
date: 2003-09-20 19:06:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/2003/09/20/saturday-2/
---
Here it is Saturday and I&apos;m in the office at work. This sucks. ;-) We&apos;ve got a big push on a partner team to ship a patch so my team and others got pulled in to help test. Since my team is in, I&apos;m in. I did arrange for us to get lunch. For someone who works at Microsoft, I don&apos;t actually get required to come in on weekends a lot. This is good because I am very jealous of my weekend time away from work. The fact that I am salaried and don&apos;t get overtime (or anything actually) for coming in on the weekend makes it all the more so. I&apos;m going to go to a soccer game of Madeline&apos;s in a while and then R and I are seeing Bubbahotep tonight. Woot!! We watched <b>Equilibrium</b>, a really bad science fiction action movie last night. It was B-list actor heaven though the cast wasn&apos;t bad per se. It played about as well as most of the movies that the Sci-Fi Channel makes for Saturday nights. In the future, after WWIII, the survivors decide all emotional passion is bad and invent a drug (and a fascist society to go with it) that everyone takes to suppress emotions. The main character is an elite "cleric" who has the fun job of hunting down people who don&apos;t get with the program and their hidden art until he winds up off of his drug... This movie actually made an attempt to explain how an elite supersoldier could kill hordes of people with his guns and dodge bullets, the "Gun Kata," which is an uberefficient gun fighting method but it was still cheezy. We&apos;re still looking at Santa Cruz for next Saturday...