---
author: admin
date: '2003-12-26 01:31:00'
layout: post
slug: greek-influence-on-buddhism
status: publish
title: Greek influence on Buddhism
wordpress_id: '2093'
categories:
- Buddhism
---

From
[http://www.silk-road.com/artl/gandhara.shtml](http://www.silk-road.com/artl/gandhara.shtml).
***GANDHARA SCHOOL*** By Irma Marx
The Hellenistic influence was nowhere more dramatic than in Gandhara, a
term now used to describe the school of semi-classical sculptures of
Pakistan and Afghanistan in the early centuries of our era. Gandhara is
the name of an ancient province and kingdom, which in classical times,
was limited to a small region in ancient India. The province Gandhara
included roughly northwestern India between the Khyber Pass and the
Indus River and the region of the Kabul Valley in Afghanistan. However,
art and architecture from the Gandharean School had been found as far
north as the Oxus River found in the Punjab.In the sixth to fourth
centuries BCE Gandhara was dominated under the Achaemenid Dynasty of
Iran. The successors of Alexander the Great maintained themselves in
Bactria and Gandhara from 322 BCE to about 50 BCE, however, as early as
the second century BCE these Greek Dynasties were already overrun by
peoples of both nomadic and Parthian-Iranian origin. Rejoined to India
under the Maurya Dynasty, the Gandhara province became the object of
intense missionary activity by the Buddhist emperor Asoka (reigned c.
273-232 BCE). He made Buddhism the state religion, enforced the Buddhist
doctrine of nonviolence (ahimsa) and prohibited animal sacrifices. In
the first century AD the Kushans, a tribe of Scythian stock from north
China made themselves masters of Gandhara. Their rule, however, was
interrupted by the invasion of the Persian King Shapur I in AD 242, and
the Buddhist civilization of Gandhara was finally completely destroyed
by the White Huns, the Hephthalites, in the sixth century. (see
geographical map) The disastrous invasion of the White Huns put an end
to all further productive activity in the once flourishing Gandhara
province. Little is known about this time period except from Chinese
pilgrims who as early as the fifth century AD undertook the long and
arduous journey to the Holy Land of Buddhism. Fa Hsien, who traveled
through the Peshawar Valley shortly after AD 400 described that the
Gandhara province flourished, and that Emperor Kanishka's successors
"were well cared for." When his successor, Sung Yen, visited the region
in 520, he reported that the country had been overrun by the Huns. A few
years later he reported that the Huns had virtually expiated Buddhism,
had destroyed monasteries and had slashed most of the population in
Gandhara. A century later, when the famous Chinese pilgrim Hsuan-Tsang
traveled through north-west India he found Gandhara in a ruined,
depopulated state. He describes in his "Records of the Western
Countries," that ruined monasteries greeted him everywhere in the
Peshawar Valley and reports of the terrible desolation of the once
flourishing Buddhist centers. However, the final chapters of the
Gandharan school has its setting in Kashmir and in remote centers such
as Fondukistan and Afghanistan where artistic activity continued as late
as the seventh century. Excavations have produced many statues, other
artifacts and some monasteries. Unfortunately, there are no
architectural monuments left intact in Gandhara only some structural
remains and sculptured fragments. However, there is ample proof of
active trade and cultural exchanges between the Mediterranean and the
Kushan territories into China. Ganharan art is often referred to as the
Graeco-or-Roman-Buddhist school. The founder of the School has been
credited to the Kushan Emperor Kanishka (c. AD 129-160), because of his
patronage to Buddhism, and his great artistic development. The character
of Gandharan art is determined by the commercial relations between the
Kushan and the Roman empires. The many archaeological discoveries of
Alexandrian and Syrian workmanship at Taxila in the Punjab and Begram in
the Kabul valley testify to the cultural and diplomatic connections with
the Graeco-Roman West. Many artifacts, in particular sculptures, have
survived and are now dispersed in major museums throughout the world.
Evidence of Hellenistic art in the form of architecture had been noted
on a number of temples from the city of Sirkap at Taxila, and on the
tumbled columns of Ay Khanum's administrative center....... (picture).
Although the presence of this material provides a Hellenistic back
ground for Gandhara art, it was the introduction of foreign workers from
the eastern centers of the Roman Empire that led to the creation of the
first Buddhist sculptures. It is not surprising that the Kushans, a
nomadic people without a tradition of monumental art, requested the
service of skilled artisans to meet the architectural and sculptural
requirements for the many Buddhist establishments. It can be assumed
that the practice of importing foreign artisans continued from the days
of Kanishka's reign until the end of Buddhism in northwest India and the
Punjab in the sixth to early seventh centuries. The majority of
Gandharan art was, however, created by native craftsmen following the
successive waves of foreign influences. The subject matter of Gandharan
art was unquestionably Buddhist, while most motifs were of western
Asiatic or Hellenistic origin. Mesopotamian motifs can be found on
Persepolitan capitals; or, forms such as the Atlantis, garland-bearing
Eros, and the semi-human creatures as the centaur and triton are part of
the repertory of Hellenistic art and introduced by Roman Eurasian
artists in the service of the Kushan court. The fantastic monsters,
however, the sphinxes and griffins had already been assimilated by the
ancient Indian schools. Sculptures played a very decisive role in the
Buddhist monasteries where they had been found in large quantities. Tall
single statues were placed in chapels to be venerated by the monks and
the faithful. Other large figures in high relief were placed with their
back to the wall, and bass relief filled all manners of places and
positions. The Gandhara schools is probably credited with the first
representation of the Buddha in human form, the portrayal of Sakyamuni
in his human shape, rather than shown as a symbol. Perhaps the school
intended to create a human Bodhisattva, a representation of Prince
Siddhartha, the Buddha Sakyamuni while still as a Bodhisattva. All early
Bodhisattvas are shown in wearing turbans, jewelry, and muslin skirts, a
costume that was an adaptation of the actual dress of Kushan and Indian
nobles. The jewelry of these royal statues were a duplication of
Hellenistic and Samatian gold, created by Western artisans. A definite
borrowing from Roman art was the method of representing the story of the
Buddhas legend in a series of separate episodes and panels. This was
accomplished in much the same way than the pictorial iconography of the
Christian legends, based on the Roman methods. On portraying the careers
of the Caesar's several distinct climactic events where shown on
separate panels. Another example are the earliest Gandhara Buddha's,
where Sakyamuni is portrayed with the head of a Greek Apollo and arrayed
in a Roman toga. It is the same early representation of Christ which
shows Him with the head of the Greek Sun-God but dressed in the garb of
the teachers of the ancient Greek world. The most frequently used
material by Gandharan artists was a soft indigenous schist that varied
in color from light to dark gray, and often contained sparkling mica
particles. Many of these statues were covered with gold leaf to give
them a luster in dark interiors. The most popular media, however, became
an easy-to-work material terracotta and stucco. Because of the fragility
of the material most statues were supported by attaching them to walls,
giving them the appearance of a three-dimensional relief. Stucco
sculptures were given a final coat of gesso, which was then painted. The
most frequent subjects were representations of Buddha, Bodhisattwas, and
attending monks or donors. The Buddha images display a variety of ethnic
types and expressions. The human head usually has appears with a perfect
oval face, regular features, with almond-shaped and slightly protruding
eyes, with gentle arching eyebrows, a straight nose, and beautifully cut
lips with a subtle smile. The Buddha's influence is evident in the
half-closed eyes suggesting meditation. The face if often unbearded, but
sometimes a mustache strikes a foreign note, most likely Kushan. The
"usnisa" or cranial bump, a predestination the Buddha was born with, is
usually seen in the form of the "chignon" a knot or a roll of hear
wrapped in silk on the dome of Buddha's head. The elongated ears
indicate the heavy, rich jewelry the Buddha wore. The Kushans were able
to establish a strong empire for a period of about three hundred years
and produced works of art reflecting both indigenous traditions and
external influences. The detection of Greek and Roman elements in the
Gandharan School testifies to the active exchange of ideals among all
the civilizations of the Classical and Central Asian worlds. The
Gandhara School reached its peak toward the end of the second century
with the production of the most significant large Buddha statues. Their
style continued to flourish into the third century until after the
Sasanian invasion, and continued until the seventh century in
Afghanistan. The Gandharan School deserves our admiration for their
unique contribution that extended far beyond the perimeters of their
province.
