--- 
wordpress_id: 1938
layout: post
title: Mayor smoked Crack? Hire him back!
date: 2003-10-24 03:48:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/2003/10/24/mayor-smoked-crack-hire-him-back/
---
It's been a busy few days and I haven't posted much. My mother did her lecture at the Pagan Scholars Meeting on Sunday on Nuit, the Infinite Goddess. It seemed rather well received and I thought it went over even better than it did at Notocon. Afterwards, we went with Brandy, Ted and others to lunch/dinner at a diner nearby and continued to chat about various pagan and magical topics, including politics, for a while before we all scattered to the eight winds. Mom, R and I went to my grandparents to celebrate her and my grandfather's birthdays with my grandparents, my daughter and, my ex-wife (weee!!). Yesterday, we had a dinner out with local pagans and OTO people with mom at a nice Thai place on Capitol Hill. <lj user="sarastro_us"> and <lj user="darkover"> were the only LJ people there other than R.</lj></lj> Tonight we were supposed to go to <lj user="jonah777">'s class at Edge of the Circle Books but I was wiped and then it turned out that I had to stay at work until 7:30 or so anyway. One of those "we're going to do something crazy with the build so we need your BVT team to hang out and work on it for ten hours and report back ASAP" things. It turns out that I have to work Saturday (with my entire team) as well. I could probably get out of it with my mom being in town (and me having planned to hang with her then) since my boss has had the same thing happen but I'd lose all credibility with my team. "Yeah, the ten of you hang out here all day at a mandatory work day but I'm going out with my mother." That would fly <strong>real well</strong> wouldn't it?</lj> On the book front, my copy of <strong>Baby's First Mythos</strong> arrived last night and it is as cute as a little Cthulhu book could ever hope to be. Today my copy of Mogg Morgan's new book, <strong><a href="http://www.mandrake.uk.net./collection2.htm">Tankhem</a></strong>, on Setian magic arrived from England. I took a gamble with this one but I like some of his other stuff and the topic matter seemed interesting with my Egyptian and magical papyri interests. He's got a version of the <strong>Great Bear Rite</strong> in it, for example. I also received a copy of Kevin Kelly's <strong>Out of Control</strong> which has been recommended by Bruce Sterling and a myriad of others over the years.