--- 
wordpress_id: 1347
layout: post
title: Delphi and Cape Sounion
date: 2003-04-08 21:09:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=1347
---
Well, we landed in Piraeus, next to Athens, early this morning. We took a the airport bus back through Athens reasoning that cars would be available at 6:30 AM there (unlike Piraeus). At the airport, we rented a little Hyundai for far too much money. They have a lot of cute, efficient cars here (one called the "smart" comes to mind) but they are all stick. Neither R or I can drive anything but an automatic so we had to take what was available for the price it was available... We drove down to Cape Sounion after this and visited the Temple of Posiedon there. I didn&apos;t see Byron&apos;s graffiti on the temple though we did see a lot of other 100 year old grafitti. I picked up a couple of white rocks (probably marble fragments but there were no signs banning this unlike other sites) and we had cappucinos at the little cafe nearby afterwards. (One of the rocks is for you, Sarastro!) We then decided, "Hey, let&apos;s go straight to Delphi now instead of doing a long slog there from Nafpoli later in the week." Three hours in a car later (argh!!), we arrived. I think we traveled over about a third of Greece to get there too! It turns out that the museum is undergoing renovation so it is entirely closed except for one room. That really sucks as a lot of the best stuff is in there. We did get to hike over the entire site itself though. We visited the Temple of Apollo, the various tresuries, the ampitheatre and the stadium. Before we go tomorrow, we&apos;ll be visited the reconstructed Athenian temple that is outside the main Delphic site. The site is simply incredible. It climbs up a fairly steep side of the moutain in terraces that are at a forty-five degree angle or so otherwise. I really felt that I was in a sacred spot and I&apos;m glad that I made it out here. We didn&apos;t get to see the Omphalos inside the museum but the spot where it once stood is marked with an eroded copy now and we took a number of pictures of me astride the axis mundi of the world. "Navel" they say but we all know what it really is! Tomorrow, we&apos;ll be driving to Corinth to visit the old ruins there and probably stopping at Eleusis on the way. In the meantime, modern Delphi is a vary nice town, almost at nice as Santorini, and we found a nice hotel on the cliff-face that looks down into the valley far below the town.