---
author: admin
date: '2003-01-22 17:31:00'
layout: post
slug: life-2
status: publish
title: Life
wordpress_id: '1256'
categories:
- Daily Life
---
I haven't written a lot lately for the most part. Life has been pretty much the same ol' same ol'.

I go to work every day, we gradually move towards shipping software, and I work with the guys who work for me.
I go home in the evenings and, depending on the day of the week, I go to Latin class, hang out with R, or read and work on projects.

I'm still wanting to pick up some sort of physical discipline but the last four places I looked at for martial arts all teach on the same nights as my Latin class so that's a bit of a concern.

I'm frustrated, to some extent, with my job but that's not new. I'm not sure what needs to change there. My program manager, who only came on board 2 1/2 months ago, quit today and will be gone within a week and a half. They changed the mandate of our feature team enough that she didn't want to be here. I'm thinking of finding a different test lead position here at the company. Things might be a bit more exciting and interesting at work if I was working on a project that I could muster more passion for... of course, changing groups is always a role of the dice. The new group (or even just the management) could suck, the project could get killed or just become lame, etc.

I'm enjoying Latin class. R and I are still going to Greece in April. We're also vaguely talking about maybe getting a house. We rent one already and it sucks to be paying someone else's mortgage.

I did register a new domain - <a href="http://veterator.org">veterator.org</a> this week. This is on a completely different set of servers than my previous domains and runs on IIS under Windows. Since I work with ASP at work, I've kind of hated coming home and looking at PHP for my domains (which is what pair.com offers). This gives me a place to work on ASP for personal projects. I may eventually eliminate memoria.com and move things over to veterator.org instead.
