---
author: admin
date: '2003-01-05 04:59:00'
layout: post
slug: weekend-fun-2
status: publish
title: Weekend Fun
wordpress_id: '1230'
categories:
- Books
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

I'm reading [*In the Dark Places of
Wisdom*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/189035001X/) by
Kingsley and
[*Survivor*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0385498721/) by
Palahniuk (author of *Fight Club*) this weekend. There's a
double-feature for you. This may qualify as Kingsley's "nut job" book
but it is interesting. I did finish the recent *21st Century Mage* book
on the Abramelin operation this week. It was "ok" but a bit overly
lightweight. On a plus note, I found Tester's [*A History of Western
Astrology*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0851152554/)
which seems to be quite a solid history text and not simply a foo-foo
astology book. I found a copy of [*Tibetan Buddhist Medicine and
Psychiatry*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877287104/) as
well. R and I spent the day futzing about the house and had a nice walk
down the road to the local coffeehouse and such. On the way back, we
rented *The Talented Mr. Ripley* (which she hadn't seen) and an MST3K
DVD of *The Crawling Hand.* It made for an enjoyable evening inn. We've
been working our way through the Dune miniseries off and on in
preparation for the next one in a couple of months. I start Latin on
Tuesday. Yee haw. I'm going to be forced to kill someone probably if I
wind up going to grad school and am forced to learn Tibetan or Sanskrit
instead. A strong argument can be made for not being able to really go
wrong learning Latin though. I'm still thinking of taking a martial arts
class. The two schools that I looked at recently only offer classes at
the same time as my Latin class so that isn't very helpful. I haven't
dug out the Silat class yet and looked at their schedule. Picking a
martial art is liking picking a dance style or something. So many
choices and by the time you know what the right one is, you're already
neck deep in a class. ;-) R has reserved our room for
[Notocon](http://www.notocon.org) though and I bought our tickets last
week. We got a room with a sitting room attached so we can have people
up to our room or maybe a party while we're there.
