--- 
layout: post
title: Free Day!
published: true
meta: {}

tags: 
- Daily Life
type: post
status: publish
---
Today was our extra free non-work day (I hope everyone else took advantage of it as well).

R and I slept in a bit and then headed up to St. Edward&apos;s Park, the park near the house we seem to be buying. For those unfamiliar, it is a 300 acre park on the edge of Lake Washington, the giant-ass lake that the Seattle metropolitan area plus sister cities surrounds. St. Edward&apos;s used to be a seminary and has a number of large buildings from that era. It also is heavily wooded and has trails up and down to the lake shore. R and I hiked about 1 3/4 miles of trail up and down a hill and generally looked around. She&apos;d never been there before and I wanted to show her the Grotto, which is a lower era off to the side which used to have an outdoor chapel space. It would be perfect for the Gnostic Mass or other ritual work.

Afterwards, we did the typical grocery shopping after a drive-by of the house we are buying... (woot!)

I then went to a local coffeehouse (Cloud City) to read a bound collection of transcripts from Namkhai Norbu&apos;s retreats, which was actually <b>very</b> informative when it comes to personal ritual practice. I also got to test out my wifi card for my pocketpc outside of home. Cloud City has a free 802.11b network and after a little finangling (the software is new to me), I was able to check my e-mail from there. I do find that the lack of a keyboard keeps me from writing much on it though.

Other than household chores, I&apos;m about to work on my latin. I realized that today isn&apos;t free from the fact that I have a quiz tomorrow evening in class. I haven&apos;t even done my notecards for vocabulary. Feh.
