---
author: admin
date: '2003-04-07 20:29:00'
layout: post
slug: knossos
status: publish
title: Knossos
wordpress_id: '1346'
categories:
- Daily Life
---
We arrived in Crete last night and checked into the Hotel Kronos, a little cheap hotel right on the waterfront by the old Venetian fortifications. We went out to dinner and then stayed up late hanging out (we didn&apos;t arrive until six or so local time in the evening).

Today, we took the bus out to Knossos after a quick breakfast. We went through that site, which was simply incredible. I know that a lot of people are unhappy about the "recreations" that Evans did there.... (For those that don&apos;t know, Evans dug up the ruins of the "palace" complex and then rebuilt sections of them according to what he believed that they looked like based on examples and models of Minoan architecture. Some of this is known to be wrong now...) ...but it made the whole site a lot more real in so many ways. If you&apos;ve ever walked around a set of ruins and just seen a foundation here, part of a wall there, an altar over there, it is often hard to get a real sense of what the place may have been like. Knossos was a multi-story complex on top of a hill with gate, many many rooms, storage areas, etc. and you get to walk through it and see Evans&apos; reconstructions as well as largely untouched ruins. It was probably the neatest thing that I&apos;ve seen since we got here.

After that, we got some lunch (mmm...gyros!) and took the bus back into Heraklion. We then went to the archaeological museum here, which is full of items from Knossos, Phaestos and oter sites. I&apos;ve seen more pottery, seals, bronze daggers and other doodads than I thought I could handle. A lot of the art on the pottery is very vivid and the upstairs is full of frescoes from Knossos that were preserved and moved there. Another incredible site.

Later, R and I went to the old Venetian square with its period fountain (dry) and had cappucinos and crepes. Cappucinos have been our coffee lifeblood here. I accidentally had a Nescafe experience and I can&apos;t figure out why that stuff is the rage here. Everyone drinks it everywhere. I don&apos;t know what is in it but it is some nasty, powdered coffee/cocoa type thing. I accidentally got it the first day here. Yarr!! Italian coffee is hard to screw up.

We&apos;re killing time in an Internet cafe now until we go down to the Venetian fortifications, dinner and then our overnight boat to Athens. We should be there tomorrow morning. At that point, we&apos;ll probably rent a car for our drives around the Greek countryside. Our first stop will be the Temple of Posiedon.
