---
author: admin
date: '2003-12-15 00:07:00'
layout: post
slug: tha-anti-caliph
status: publish
title: Tha Anti-Caliph
wordpress_id: '2071'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

No, not an OTO essay! An old article by Peter Lamborn Wilson (aka Hakim
Bey) that I had a photocopy of from over a decade ago. It's a lecture he
gave. **THE ANTI-CALIPH** **Ibn 'Arabi, Inner Wisdom, and the Heretic
Tradition** *by Peter Lamborn Wilson*

### I. ![image](http://www.hermetic.com/bey/anticaliph.jpg)

and Khezr, the Hidden Prophet, the Green Man, King of Hyperborea, wily
servant of Moses, trickster-cook of Alexander, Khezr who drank from the
fountain of life in the Land of Darkness. Flowers and herbs spring trp
in his footsteps, and he strolls across the water, walking toward Ibn
'Arabi's ship, coming closer; his green robe trailing on green waves -
or perhaps woven of waves. Or Khezr appears in the desert with water and
initiation for the masterless ones, the mad and blameworthy, the unique
ones... \`And three things of this life are worthy of the glance: water,
green things, and a beautiful face...' and the Hidden Imam who vanished
into a cave, perhaps in Samarra, perhaps in Yemen, who lives beyond the
Isthmus of Similitudes in the midst of the sea of Images, on an island
all of emerald, with trees of' emerald and flowers of green beryl,
palaces of jasper and jade - the young man dressed in black, who appears
in dreams to alchemists, who initiates in dreams... and Ovays al-Qarani,
hermit of the Yemen who met the Prophet - but only in dreams - who
upheld the Household of All - who appears to the masterless ones in
dreams and initiates them into the Order of the Ovaysiyya.

### II. The Silsilah

Sohrawardi al Magtul, who was executed for heresy, established for
himself a silsilah or Initiatic Chain, consisting of teachers whom he
met in visions or dreams - that is, in the Imaginal Realm. Here then
follows a list in no particular order, of names each of which
constitutes a link in such a chain - Imaginal or imaginary... Mansur ibn
al-Hallaj, executed for heresy, for preaching 'I am the Truth', defender
of Satan as \`the perfect lover and unitarian', supporter of the
Zinjarite Black Slave Rebellion, condemned to the gibbet on a warrant
signed by his own sufi master; Hafez Shirazi, who recommended that we
\`stain our prayercarpets with wine'; Mahmud Shabistari, who said, \`If
moslems really understood Islam, they would be idol-worshippers'; Ahmad
Ghazzali, Fakhroddin Iraqi and Awhadoddin Kermani, the three poets of
Witness Play or 'contemplation of the Beardless'; Shaykh Husayn Kashefi,
nay patron alchemist-saint of Herat; Lal Shabazz Qalandar, the \`Red
Hawk' of Sindh, shaykh of the Lawless dervishes and hasheesheen;
Hassan-i Sabbah, the Old Man of the Mountain of Alamut, founder of the
Assassins; and his descendant Hassan II 'On Whose Mention Be Peace', who
declared that 'the Chains of the Law have been broken'; the Egyptian
Fatimid 'Anti-Caliph' Hakim, who wrote treatises on alchemy and ordered
that day be turned to night and night to day in Cairo, who vanished into
the desert; Sunan Kalidjaga, who brought esoteric Islam to Java and
invented the Wayang Kulit Shadow Puppet play, based on the Hindu epics;
Mushtaq Ali Shah the mad musician, who was stoned to death in Kerman for
playing the call to Prayer on his sehtar; Mohiyoddin Ibn 'Arabi,
initiated by Khezr, chased out of Cairo for writing love poems to a
fourteen-year-old girl, founder of the School of the Oneness of Being.
By invoking each of these figures to bestow a particular *baraka*on the
present undertaking, enough will have been said to those who are
familiar with their names, that what follows will be almost superfluous.
One meets these shaykhs by pilgrimages to their tombs, or to their books
(for cenotaphs and divans are both square dead objects which may seem to
hold living spirits) - or in visions, or dreams - and virtually
everything we might say here is already swallowed up by their presence.
'Catastrophe Theory' in science deals with sudden and drastic changes in
some feature of a system, such as the earth's crust, or human society.
In popular usage the word catastrophe has 'bad' connotations, but some
sudden changes may well be experienced as positive. Revelation itself
might be called a catastrophe. Mystical insight or Wisdom *(hikmah)*can
also work catastrophically on the system known as human consciousness.
Scholars generally limit themselves to descriptions of change while
mystics and poets prefer to participate in or even to precipitate
catastrophes of consciousness. What follows can be classified neither as
scholarship nor mystical poetry; it is rather a prolegomena to a study
of certain catastrophic potentialities in the teachings of Ibn 'Arabi
and the heretical tradition. Here we are concerned neither with facts
nor with poetry *per se,*but with *poetic facts -*bits of information
which, at a certain density, may cause a sudden breakthrough or
catastrophic breakdown of the border between ordinary consciousness and
the *alam-i khyyal*or World of Imagination. What follows is almost more
*story*than scholarly text - the idea of \`fiction' will help provide an
appropriate bezel for our shadowy confusion, hyperbole and rhetoric,
palpable orientalismo, scandalous and unfounded assertions. This text
may push itself toward the edge of discourse, in danger of a
Humpty-Dumpty-like crash into totally arbitrary semantics (\`words mean
what I want them to mean!'). As one of the Persian poets (Salman Savaji)
said: Who does not know my bad reputation? like a bath-tub fallen off
the roof!

### III. Ibn 'Arabi and the Heretics

In the long and beautiful introduction to his *Creative Imagination in
the Sufism of Ibn 'Arabi,*the late Henry Corbin summarized, in effect,
an idiosyncratic philosophy of \`Oriental Wisdom' which illuminated all
his writing. This essay presents itself as rooted in a tradition: Corbin
mentions all his favourite figures (many of the same listed in the
'silsilah' of the present text as well). Corbin's essay focusses on
certain events in the biography of the Shaykh al-Akbar, but Corbin's
sub-text is in fact his own spiritual autobiography. As he says, he has
*lived*certain events, temporal and a- temporal, historical and
spiritual. The *ta'vil*in this context serves as more than a tool of the
intellect or even of the Imagination: like a bathysphere, it offers to
plunge the entire self, body included, into the depths - a Catastrophe
Machine! One of these events, Ibn 'Arabi's birthday, provokes in Corbin
an indulgence **in**sheer occult synchronicity, the celebration of a
coincidence which assumed for him an archetypal importance. According to
the lunar calendar, this birthday (17 Ramazan 560/July 28, 1165) marked
the first anniversary of the proclamation of the Great Resurrection at
Alamut (17 Ramazan 559/August 8, 1164). Corbin's exquisite hagiography
invites us to meditate on this double anniversary, this holiday, but
does not stop to explain *why.*A clue has been offered, or perhaps one
of Corbin's obsessions has briefly and rather mysteriously surfaced.
What was the Great Resurrection and what connection might it have with
lbn 'Arabi beside a happenstance of dating? Corbin himself had plenty to
say on the subject in other books, which cannot be too highly
recommended. Here however a somewhat different slant is proposed, one
based on the literal significance of the Great Resurrection of *Ruz-i
Qiyamat.*In brief, Hassan 11, the Ismaili Pir of Alamut, proclaimed on
this day a general esoteric abrogation of the Shariah. The veil of
dissimulation *(tagiyya)*was lifted from the letter of the Law, and its
outer form was shattered. 'The Chains of the Law have been broken.' The
uncovering of the inner meaning of Revelation results in *a benign
reversal*of its outward symbolism; those who participate in this gnosis
are freed from both the, literal meaning and the legal stipulations of
organized religion. In both senses of the word they have *broken the
code.*The Ismailis (or 'Assassins') of Alamut signalled this general
amnesty from the tyranny of Exoteric Authority by drinking wine for
lunch in the middle of Ramazan: thus they broke their Fast forever.
Outward Islam must of necessity view the Qiyamat as antinomian,
heretical and revolutionary - and indeed it did so, with good reason. No
doubt, as Corbin emphasizes, Ismailism was primarily *gnosis,*Oriental
Wisdom - but it also acted with overt militancy and stealthy terror to
propagandize itself. In Islamdom, where politics and religion form parts
of a seamless life and culture, 'heresy' works as both critique and
polemic, as discourse and as war. Heresy speaks the same language as its
surrounding culture but insists that certain words possess a
catastrophic significance: hidden meanings capable of transforming an
entire world suddenly from within itself, like a self-resurrecting
phoenix. The Qiyamat, then, represents a radical break with
institutional, ritual and traditional Islam - a rupture which cannot be
attributed to lbn 'Arabi. His autobiographical writings bear witness to
a classical sufi intention to *intensify*the ritual aspect of Islam as
part of his practical path. Nevertheless, the hyper-orthodox have always
looked on the Shaykh as somehow *risky,*if not downright suspect. For
example, while living in Egypt he published his *Interpreter of Desires,
a*book of poems celebrating his love for a young girl he met while
circumambulating the Kaaba in Mecca. The local ulema smelled blasphemy;
lbn 'Arabi hastily removed himself to Syria - and we can thank the
outraged mullahs for inspiring his next work, the *Interpreter of the
Interpreter,*in which he defends his erotic-mystical ambiguities with
dazzling scholasticism. Centuries later (a few years ago) Ibn 'Arabi was
again in trouble in Egypt: the Muslim Brotherhood and other
reactionaries inspired a law banning publication of his M*eccan
Revelations.*And scholars like Fazlur Rahman still blame him for the
ruination of orthodox sufism. Ibn 'Arabi's continental mass, so to
speak, covers too much territory to fit on any single map. His writings
have been used to bolster up the most impeccably orthodox mysticism - as
in the North African sufi orders, for example - as well as many other
types of Islamic esotericism, some not so orthodox. Treatises such as
the *R. al-ahadiyya*(on the hadith 'Whoso knoweth his Lord'), which
present a pure and radical monism, might well serve the outlaw purposes
of Ismaili metaphysicians. Indeed, Corbin shows that Ismailis did make
such use of Ibn 'Arabi's teachings on *ta'vil,*the Perfect Man, the
Oneness of Being, etc. The Nizaris of Alamut experienced the Great
Resurrection as an historical moment and as a mythic or Imaginal
Archetype; what Ibn 'Arabi gave them was a new vocabulary with which to
expand their exegesis of the Qiyamat and its radical ramifications. "I o
the Persian poets the Shaykh bequeathed still another map, one which
begins its cartomantic project with texts like *The Interpreter of
Desires,*and the 28th chapter of the *Fusus al-hikam*(on the hadith
"Three things of this world are made worthy of love to tile: women,
perfume and prayer'). Here Love is declared the equivalent or perhaps
superior of religion; the human beloved becomes a Witness *(shahed),*a
Theophany of the Real. Again, the poets received from Ibn 'Arabi a
language of discourse with which to expand their comprehension of a
complex already central to their very being: *eros,*desire, and the
borderland between erotic and mystical consciousness. Out of such
speculation arose a spiritual practice, the \`Witness Game', which uses
Imaginal Yoga to transmute erotic desire *into*spiritual consciousness.
The means include poetic and musical improvisation, dance, and \`gazing'
chastely at beautiful boys (whence the practice was also known as
'Contemplation of the *heartless'),* This teaching was perfected in the
centuries after Ibn 'Arabi's death by a series of gifted poets closely
associated with his School - Fakhroddin Iraqi, Awhadoddin Kermani and
Abdul Rahman Jami, to name three of the best-known. Without specific
reference to the Witness Game, other poets such as Mahmud Shabistari and
Shah Nematollah Vali synthesized Ibn 'Arabi's metaphysics with a general
poetic and romantic symbolism. All this together constitutes what can be
called a Persian 'School of Love' within the general context of a School
of *wahdat al-wujud.* Needless to say, although the poets of the Witness
Game followed the letter of the Shariah and its sexual code, their
dangerous game of Sublimation was condemned as rank heresy by such as
Ibn Taymiyya, who complained, \`They kiss a slave boy and claim to have
seen God!' However orthodox (or not) the sufis might have been in their
private lives, their poetry has given much aid and comfort to \`real
heretics' like the Ismailis, who would of course take quite literally
such lines as Iraqi's: Forget the Kaaba: The vintner's gates are open!
Despite the protests of scholars like lvanov and even Corbin, the later
(post-Alamut) lsmailis did not adopt Persian *dervishi*sufism simply as
a mask. They *incorporated*such poets as Shabastari and Shah Nematollah
wholesale into their grand synthesis, just as they did with Ibn 'Arabi's
more austere metaphysics. [Read the rest of the article on
Hermetic.com](http://www.hermetic.com/bey/anticaliph.html)
