---
author: admin
date: '2003-07-27 02:53:00'
layout: post
slug: i-used-to-have-every-issue
status: publish
title: I used to have every issue...
wordpress_id: '1648'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

From the New York Times... Wired': The Coolest Magazine on the Planet By
DAVID CARR Wired magazine, that storied artifact of a digital age, was
conceived by its editors as a ''a reverse time capsule. It would sail
back through time and land at people's feet.'' And so it has, most
recently in the form of ''Wired: A Romance,'' a book by one of the
magazine's contributing editors, Gary Wolf. Our notions of the future
have a tendency to age quickly, and Wired, a magazine that served as
both Boswell and bomb thrower for the geekerati in the 1990's, seems to
have aged more quickly than most. The seminal publication, Wolf writes,
was created in the midst of a digital revolution that its high priest,
Louis Rossetto, liked to refer to as a ''Bengali typhoon.'' By the time
Rossetto and Wired's co-founder, Jane Metcalfe, were thrown clear,
everything had changed, but not in the ways that they once thought it
would. Wired was important not just because it was the first magazine to
make the computer world seem hip; it also trained its eye on the
implications of the onrushing new technology, not merely on appraising
the newest machines and trendiest gadgets. (Though Wired featured plenty
of articles about those things, too.) The magazine, Rossetto promised
somewhat grandiosely early on, would foment ''a revolution without
violence that embraces a new, nonpolitical way to improve the future
based on economics beyond macro control, consensus beyond the ballot
box, civics beyond government and communities beyond the confines of
time and geography.'' Rossetto's manifesto seems quaint just 10 years
later, but it found many disciples. Gary Wolf, an early Wired employee,
was among them, and he has written a deceptively deadpan recollection
that reads more like a libretto than a straightforward work of
journalism. Wolf expertly traces the magazine's heavily hyped
ascendancy, though, sadly, most readers will know all along that the
magazine Rossetto saw as a Trojan horse for revolution was eventually
sold in 1998 to a corporation (Conde Nast) like any common asset. (The
magazine still exists, though it doesn't carry the swagger and prestige
it once did.) Wolf writes with a former true believer's skepticism, a
wan idealism rubbed out by subsequent events. As his book's title
suggests, Wolf is still a bit wistful about Wired's careering journey
through the 90's. It's hard to blame him. The corporate-dominated
magazine industry tends to stay safely behind significant issues, while
Wired was that odd indie publication that actually enabled a movement by
appealing to its nobler instincts. But as Wolf demonstrates, Wired's
purity of purpose -- Rossetto seemed to care about money only as oxygen
for his dream -- did not inoculate the magazine from the ambient greed
that reduced a hoped-for paradigm shift to a pile of failed I.P.O.'s.
''Wired: A Romance'' is less a love story than a theological autopsy of
a religion that flourished and went away in less than a decade. Things
happened quickly for Wired -- remember ''Internet time''? At its height
in the mid-90's, Wired could be found in the lobbies of venture
capitalists, on the light tables of designers, underneath the coffee
cups of computer geeks and in the middle of the only conversation that
seemed to matter. It was, briefly, the coolest magazine on the planet.
This book is fundamentally a biography of Rossetto, a larger-than-life
personality whom Wolf compares to ''a magnet whose grip increased
dramatically at close range.'' In retrospect, it would be easy to
mistake Rossetto for another would-be Internet guru and Wired as a curio
of a bygone time, but as Wolf makes clear, the revolution that Rossetto
championed was not about the Web. Rossetto saw desktop publishing as a
profound reinvention of the printing press. ''He thought computer
publishing would change the world,'' Wolf writes. And Rossetto knew a
thing or two about revolution. As Wolf points out, Rossetto, a former
anarchist who obtained a master's degree in business administration from
Columbia, was a global itinerant, a gaunt, hippie-ish Zelig who just
happened to be in the neighborhood when the Shining Path emerged in
Peru, when the Tamil rebellion began in Sri Lanka, when the Red Brigades
sowed chaos in Italy. Small wonder Rossetto ended up in San Francisco in
the early 90's with Jane Metcalfe, then his girlfriend, on the cusp of
another kind of insurgency, both of them working to finance a new kind
of magazine. Rossetto wanted to call their journal DigIt -- as in either
''digit'' or ''dig it'' -- a bad idea that Metcalfe mercifully talked
him out of. The new magazine would be named Wired. With the help of
$20,000 from a sympathetic Dutch entrepreneur, the pair managed to get
inexpensive access to a Canon color copier -- an exotic technology at
the time -- to produce a prototype. Several of Wired's more durable
angels, investors with real money who bought Rossetto's conceits, signed
on later. And John Plunkett, the man responsible for Wired's
neon-suffused, anarchic design, committed to joining the magazine in
spite of himself. This glossy fever dream of a magazine made its debut
at the Macworld conference on Jan. 2, 1993. The early adopters snatched
it up and Wired was on its way. But Wolf demonstrates that Rossetto
always seemed to keep his ambitions just ahead of his funding. Chunks of
the enterprise were handed out to investors so that Wired could expand
to the Web, to television, to Europe and beyond. The magazine's Web
site, HotWired, turned out to be a particularly effective way of making
money disappear. Wolf, who became HotWired's executive editor in 1995,
appears in the narrative at this point, saying that after meetings with
Rossetto he left his boss's office with ''the light step of a person who
has been given permission to be bad.'' But Wolf's efforts to enrich his
writer friends with lucrative freelance assignment for the Web site
comes off as a misdemeanor in felonious times. The pressure to move
Wired toward an initial public offering drove an ill-advised effort for
bigness at all costs. No one cared about profits, and deals were made
willy-nilly to build the hypothetical value of the company, including
adding a search engine, the gewgaw of the moment. The pranksters at
Suck, a sardonic (and now defunct) site built by Wired employees on the
sly, captured the era's ethos with carnal clarity. In an essay written
at the very beginning of the Web boom, Wolf writes, ''The Sucksters'
advice was to fluff up a site, locate a rich, stupid buyer and then run
away fast before the concoction deflated.'' To his credit, Rossetto
never saw how giving away content free on the Web could make anyone
rich. Wolf describes -- in too much detail, because he happened to be in
the middle of it -- how Rossetto fought to make visitors to HotWired
register, which some believed violated the Web's ethos. By this time,
bankers and shareholders were looking over his shoulder, accusing him of
being a profligate Luddite at a revolution he once led. While charting
the Nasdaq's rise and eventual fall, Wolf shows Rossetto and Metcalfe
readying Wired for a ''liquidity event,'' that supremely validating 90's
moment. But when they hit the road in October 1996 to pitch investors,
Rossetto's overweening ambitions and the market's gyrations left Wired's
public offering dead on arrival. Rossetto become so preoccupied with
saving the business that he eventually handed leadership of the magazine
over to Katrina Heron, a former editor at Vanity Fair and The New
Yorker. Heron, who is now a consultant for The New York Times, proved to
be an able and popular steward of the magazine, but in stepping aside
Rossetto had built his own gallows. The money men who had attached
themselves to Wired set up a series of impossible financial targets for
Rossetto, and in March 1998 he and Metcalfe were cast out of the future
they had built. The magazine was eventually sold to Conde Nast, and its
two founders ended up with $30 million and a profoundly bad taste in
their mouths. Wolf allows Andrew Anker, the ferociously ambitious C.E.O.
of the company, to serve up an epitaph for the ideals that once drove
Wired. With the sale of the magazine on the table, Wolf recounts how
Anker and other senior Wired employees went to a bar in San Francisco
for an impromtu wake. Anker gleefully tallies up his substantial gains
to the outrage of his less fortunate colleagues. ''What is this, 'Sesame
Street'?'' Anker said. ''Every man for himself means every man for
himself!'' The future, it turned out, would still be written by Charles
Darwin in spite of Wired's best efforts. David Carr is a media reporter
for The Times.
