---
author: admin
date: '2003-04-18 03:17:00'
layout: post
slug: tivo
status: publish
title: Tivo
wordpress_id: '1356'
categories:
- Technology
---

So I bought a Tivo today... I'd been looking at getting one for a while.
A lot of my coworkers have them and they are pretty damned cool. I was
going to get an old used one on ebay and then add another large hard
drive to it originally. I didn't want to pay more than $100 for it...
So, I looked at a bunch of ebay auctions and it was doable. I then
happened to look in Microsoft's internal classifieds today and someone
had, today, listed a tivo for sale. It was a Sony one, which is the
slightly nicer brand, and the owner had already added an 80 GB drive to
it (for a total of 110 GB). It listed for $120, which I figured was a
deal with it already being upgraded. I hopped right on it and, by the
end of the day, I had a shiny silver tivo to call my own. At the highest
video quality (which is quite nice), it can hold 34 hours of shows. R
thinks tivos are in the "kinda cool" realm but has philosophical issues
with paying Tivo $12 a month for their service. The service is how tivo
knows what shows are on and the metadata for those shows. You can teach
the tivo to record all of certain shows or shows with certain actors and
it can, over time, learn your preferences. All of this needs the service
so I'm paying it myself. I feel like a consumer but I'm happy with my
bargain purchase. Of course, I'm going to stick a wireless card in it so
I can pull the data off of it, encode it as divX and burn it to CD-R's
anyway... ;-)
