---
author: admin
date: '2003-12-27 14:04:00'
layout: post
slug: movies
status: publish
title: Movies
wordpress_id: '2096'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Science Fiction
---

Thanks to for this one... Further adventures of the anti-hero of **Pitch
Black**, Riddick:
[http://www.thechroniclesofriddick.com/](http://www.thechroniclesofriddick.com/).
Evil cultists, silly action, etc. On a finer movie note, I just watched
Akira Kurosawa's **Hidden Fortress** this morning. I hadn't actually
seen it ever before. I quite liked it and consider it defnitely in the
category of not just "Fine Japanese Films" but fine films in general.
*The life of a man Burn it with the fire The life of an insect Throw it
in the fire Ponder and you'll see The world is dark And this floating
world Is a dream* I just found [this
book](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0571199828/) listed online
about Akira Kurosawa and Toshiro Mifune's work. Many of you probably
don't know since you don't know me personally but I grew up, starting as
a child young enough that I couldn't read, watching Akira Kurosawa's
work and have fond memories from that period of seeing Toshira Mifune on
screen. With a rare display of intelligence, I managed to see **Ran** in
its first, limited, run in the U.S. when I was a teen. My mother was a
Nipponophile when I was a child and I know that she was hot to give me
the name "Toshiro" before I was born, though I am, instead, named the
same as my father and his father before him. (No, I'm not making this
up. I would have been "Toshiro Billings." For a girl, I believe it was
"Mariko Sallee Billings." My grandmother's name is "Mae Sallee Beals"
with the first two being one of those two part southern names like "Sue
Ellen.") I don't know how it turned out that I'd never seen this one
film but I'm glad that I finally have.
