---
author: admin
date: '2003-08-29 05:17:00'
layout: post
slug: work-dinner
status: publish
title: Work Dinner
wordpress_id: '1874'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Last night I had a mandatory after-work work dinner. My boss wanted to
talk with those of us who will be reporting to him in our new
organization so he scheduled a two hour meeting post-work. The only plus
is that we went to a fairly nice restaurant and work picked up the tab.
I had a nice steak. I generally don't care for things that cause my work
to spill into my personal time. In many ways, it's bad enough that I
have to work full time for "the Man" as it is without it also getting in
the way of doing things like going to Brandy's sex magick class or the
like. Luckily, my boss generally does understand these things. He's been
working 12 to 14 hours a day for the last month or so because of all of
the shit going down and the upcoming reorg. It's hard to bitch too much
about a work dinner when you know your boss and others at the table were
at meetings on Saturday and he was home working on our performance
reviews on Sunday. It's just not the life that I want though. I've
worked for him for two years now. Every now and then, he asks me when
I'm going to become a test manager or what we need to do towards that
end. I've explained to him that if being a test manager means working 12
or more hours a day, six days a week, why the hell would I do it? I know
the pay wouldn't go up that dramatically at all. Other than that, I'm
pondering whether I want to do the two years MA in Buddhist Studies with
Naropa or not. It isn't completely ideal (I'd prefer to do a History MA
locally but they have no evening program) but I could do it while
working if I wanted to do so. I'd probably still take a student loan out
for a chunk of it because it's probably about $8K - $10K a year for the
program. As long as I keep working, I should be able to pay it off if I
do it. I'm also getting to the point with a lot of the Tibetan Buddhist
stuff that I think six or eight weeks of a Tibetan class so I could at
least read the alphabet and know basic pronunciation rules would be
helpful.
