--- 
layout: post
title: The Matrix
published: true
meta: 
  ljID: "2929"
tags: 
- Daily Life
type: post
status: publish
---
I found this at <a href="http://coolmel.typepad.com/iblog/2003/11/what_is_the_mat.html">http://coolmel.typepad.com/iblog/2003/11/what_is_the_mat.html</a>
<p>It is an attempt to figure out the entire Matrix series. It is long and fool of spoilers. <lj-cut text="read at your own risk..."></p>
<blockquote>
	Where did the <a href="http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/11.11/matrix.html">
	Wachowski&apos;s</a> get their source material? Here are some ideas on how the 
	storyline weaves in <a href="http://www.jitterbug.com/origins/myth.html">
	mythology</a> - it might help you understand the plot:<br />
	<br />
	About the year 2199 machines gained artificial intelligence and humans 
	freaked out and went to war. The machines used solar power, so humans 
	scorched the sky in a nuclear winter, and the machines started enslaving 
	humans and drawing off their heat for power. Now they create test tube 
	babies, grow humans in fields and plug them into the Matrix pods when 
	they&apos;re children, feeding them on the liquified remains of those who die. 
	The Matrix was designed to provide a mental stimulus for the human bodies. 
	The word Matrix is derived from the Latin word for &quot;womb&quot;, which is itself 
	derived from the Latin word for &quot;mother&quot;, which is &quot;mater&quot;. 
	<p>The First Matrix was designed as a perfect utopia but without choices. 
	Humans did not accept it as real so they just kept waking up in their pods 
	or dying. It was a disaster. So the Matrix was rebooted and redesigned to 
	reflect human civilization in 1999, complete with freedom for people to do 
	wrong things. Each person lived out their life in the Matrix program, acting 
	and being acted upon. Free choice meant some people were good, others were 
	bad, and these interactions created a perfect replica of reality. 99% of 
	people accepted the program because of free agency. But 1% didn&apos;t, which is 
	where the Architect had a problem to solve. </p>
	<p>The Architect program is pure mathematics - left brain - order. The 
	Oracle program is pure intuition - right brain - chaos. It was the Oracle 
	that suggested the Architect redesign the Matrix to give humans free agency. 
	Since humans were to have choices, so must the programs sent to watch over 
	them, so they could adapt to the variances created by choice, and keep 
	things in check. </p>
	<p>To help the Oracle program understand human intuition even better, and 
	thus help the Architect reduce the 1% rejection factor, the Oracle was to 
	encourage people who sought enlightenment. She would prompt them with 
	cryptic questions designed to draw out their free thinking. When they needed 
	a special nudge, she would upgrade their ability to think and do with an 
	enhancement code they would take in through the mouth; a cookie, some candy, 
	etc. </p>
	<p>In the Second Matrix a person responded to this stimulus and became The 
	One. They were younger than 11, and childlike in their view of love, right 
	and wrong. In the trilogy we learn that people older than 11 seldom adjust 
	to the non-Matrix reality because they are too fixed in their ways. Enhanced 
	with upgraded abilities The One learned of the truth about the human 
	condition and hacked into the program to wake people up. These kids banded 
	together and used what remained of real world human technology to mount a 
	resistance against the machines, hence the hovercraft, weapons, walkers, 
	etc. This gear was found on the surface and transported down to Zion in a 
	time before the machines had Sentinels patrolling. When the machines 
	realized the underground pipes and passages were being used as transport 
	conduits by their enemies, they started sending out the Sentinels, but by 
	then Zion was operational as a command centre and the kids had grown into 
	adults. </p>
	<p>The One of the Second Matrix eventually had enough experiences for a 
	download of their knowledge into the Source to provide the Architect with 
	new data to reduce the dropout rate of people plugged in. They were taken to 
	the Architect&apos;s white room, and given the choice: walk through the Left Door 
	to upgrade the Source with new data as was always intended, or walk through 
	the Right Door back into the Matrix. If they chose the Right Door, the 
	Matrix would be shut down while The One was inside, killing them and 
	everyone else, and the Sentinels would wipe out the people in Zion. If they 
	chose the Left Door, the Matrix program would get enhanced to better deal 
	with human intuition and the resulting causality, and The One would be 
	returned to the real world with his special program deleted (no longer The 
	One) to select 16 women and 7 other men to repopulate Zion while anyone not 
	chosen would be killed off by the Sentinels. This core group would then be 
	in place to receive anyone else who dropped out of the Matrix program - 
	which would happen because the Oracle program would continue to seek out and 
	encourage kids to be The One, so the machines could further investigate 
	human choice, intuition and causality. </p>
	<p>Reboot, and in comes the Third Matrix and so on until the Sixth, when NEO 
	emerged as the anomaly called The One. Neo is different to the other Ones. 
	He was woken up older than 11. This means instead of having a general love 
	for the people in the Matrix like the younger Ones had, he was old enough to 
	have a specific love for Trinity, and a desire to save her inside the 
	Matrix. Which is why he chose the Right Door instead of the Left Door in the 
	Architect&apos;s room. </p>
	<p>He was also different in that instead of running from the Agents he 
	decided to confront them. Being a computer hacker might have given him a 
	special perspective with which to operate inside the Matrix. When the Oracle 
	upgraded his abilities with a cookie Neo developed the ability to see the 
	Matrix in code while he was inside it. He could rewrite the code to stop the 
	Agent&apos;s bullets, to reboot himself after being killed, to dive into Agent 
	Smith&apos;s code and insert himself in its place, and even to fly. </p>
	<p>But when he dived into Smith some of the upgraded Neo code wrote onto the 
	Smith code. For the first time an Agent program was unplugged from its 
	normal protocols and had freedom to reboot itself and overwrite other 
	entities, like Neo had done. We saw it as Smith replicating himself. </p>
	<p>This created a second and unanticipated anomaly inside the Matrix which 
	threatened to bring the system down. So in Reloaded the Oracle told Neo he 
	had to find the Keymaker, and get inside the Source, which ultimately was 
	the objective written into his programming, but now needed to happen sooner 
	rather than later. The system needed a reboot to delete Smith. She gave Neo 
	some candy to rewrite his compliance to this goal, and told him he&apos;d already 
	made the choice and now needed to understand it. </p>
	<p>When Neo, Trinity and Morpheus meet the Merovingian he talks about 
	causality and how people can eat programs like orgasmic cake that force a 
	reaction that can&apos;t be controlled, like Neo had with the candy. He tells Neo 
	he&apos;s come there because he was told to be there, a puppet to the system. He 
	denies Neo the Keymaker. Persephone helps Neo find the Keymaker, and Neo 
	gets to the Source where he has the same discussion with the Architect that 
	other Ones had before him. </p>
	<p>However, this time The One does not rejoin the source code to reset the 
	system. This time, his adult love is stronger than the compliance and 
	causality code he&apos;d been given. So instead of losing himself to save 
	everyone in the Matrix - as past Ones had done - he saves Trinity from 
	falling to her death, and restarts the code governing her heart. His 
	consciousness is now more Program than human, living in a human body. Agent 
	Smith was also a Program that had overwritten a human&apos;s code (Bane&apos;s) to 
	upload into the real world and possess Bane&apos;s human body. </p>
	<p>Neo and Smith are the same; one positive, one negative; one good, one 
	evil. The Oracle says it clearly in Revolutions: Smith is the result of the 
	anomaly trying to balance itself. </p>
	<p>Neo&apos;s choice to save Trinity has changed everything. The system is still 
	threatened by Smith&apos;s behavior, so the Oracle makes a new choice; one she 
	has never done before because no version of The One has ever chosen the 
	difficult path as opposed to easy one of just resetting the system. She 
	allows herself to become merged with Smith in the hope that she&apos;ll be able 
	to help Neo when the time is right. His choices being different to the 
	program she fed Neo have made a believer out of her. Neo is stronger than 
	his programming. He is really The One: self-aware and self-governing - a 
	true god in machine terms. </p>
	<p>At the end of their final battle, Smith tells Neo what the Oracle last 
	told Neo: &quot;everything that has a beginning has an end.&quot; This was the Oracle 
	speaking to Neo through Smith, which Smith realizes because these aren&apos;t his 
	words. When Smith replicated over the Oracle to see with her eyes, she fed 
	him a vision of the future that was what he wanted to see, right down to 
	what he would do, where he would stand and what he would say. Neo realizes 
	the only way to end this is to sacrifice himself. He allows Smith to 
	replicate onto him, thus destroying The One&apos;s program. Since Smith and The 
	One are opposites, their merger cancels the other out, which is why all the 
	Smiths simply delete. </p>
	<p>The Architect then reboots to start the Seventh Matrix. This time there 
	is an agreement for peace. There will be no reduction of Zion down to 24 
	people. Everyone will live. The Architect tells the rebooted Oracle that the 
	machines will keep their peace. But he suspects the humans will not. The 
	Oracle suggests Neo or another One will return. </p>
	<p>I have a suspicion that because Neo&apos;s consciousness became more Program 
	than human, even though his real world body died, his essence will be loaded 
	into the Matrix as a Program. I think that Persephone was also a previous 
	One now loaded into the Matrix. As a program not connected with a jacked-in 
	human body, she remembers her mortal life, but can no longer experience the 
	physicality, which is why she wanted to kiss Neo to remember what love feels 
	like. Persephone knows Neo&apos;s fate will be the same as hers, which is why she 
	tells Neo and Trinity that nothing lasts forever. When a One completes their 
	mission and rejoins the source code, they are a product of two influences - 
	the Oracle and the Architect, chaos and order, yin and yang, mom and dad.
	</p>
	<p>The post-mortal Ones are therefore the children of the Matrix gods. In 
	mythology, Persephone was the beautiful daughter of Zeus (= the Architect) 
	and Demeter, goddess of fertility (aka creation, intuition = the Oracle). 
	Persephone was abducted by Hades and taken to his underground kingdom to be 
	his wife. In the Matrix mythos, the Merovingian is Hades, his underground 
	night club is Club Hel. </p>
	<p>The Merovingian is not a previous One, but he has survived Neo&apos;s 
	predecessors and will also survive Neo. Merve is a Program that traffics 
	information, a router. He surrounds himself with bodyguards and henchmen 
	drawn out of the programs used to make movies and TV shows for the people 
	plugged into the Matrix - he uses werewolves (the silver bullet killed him) 
	and ghosts (the phase-shifting Twins) - because they cannot die inside the 
	Matrix as easily as &quot;normal&quot; characters can. He keeps the Keymaster because 
	he wants all the keys for all the backdoors in the Matrix. This is power. He 
	also wants the Oracle&apos;s eyes to gain more power. </p>
	<p>In an interesting esoteric versions of history the Merovingian kings were 
	direct descendants of Mary Magdalene and Jesus Christ. Some say the Roman 
	church killed off all remnants of this dynasty (in the Cathar Heresy of 
	Languedoc and during the Inquisition) in order to rule the religion through 
	the spiritual dynasty of Peter instead of the &quot;holy blood&quot; of Mary 
	Magdalene&apos;s descendants, who were the Roman church&apos;s rivals in authority. In 
	Matrix terms, the Merovingian would therefore be the offspring of one of the 
	earlier incarnations of The One. We see that programs can have children, as 
	is the case of Kali and Rama Chandra appealing to the Merovingian to take 
	their daughter Sati across to the Matrix. </p>
	<p>Another connection here: Kali (Sati&apos;s mother in the Matrix) is a name of 
	the Hindu goddess who was the destroyer of evil spirits. Her devotees 
	believed wisdom meant learning that no coin has only one side: as death 
	cannot exist without life, so life cannot exist without death - a central 
	tenet in Revolutions. </p>
	<p>The Matrix movies draw from many places for the characters and 
	storylines. </p>
	<p>PEOPLE</p>
	<p>Architect = Zeus, god, father of the Matrix.<br />
	<br />
	Oracle = Demeter, wife of Zeus, goddess, mother of the Matrix.<br />
	<br />
	Persephone = daughter of Zeus &amp; Demeter.<br />
	<br />
	Merovingian = Hades, the devil. Son of a previous One.<br />
	<br />
	Neo / Thomas Anderson = neo is a prefix for &quot;new&quot;, an anagram of &quot;one&quot;, and 
	&quot;anderson&quot; literally means &quot;son of man&quot;, the self-title of Jesus Christ.<br />
	<br />
	Trinity = unity of three distinct Persons.<br />
	<br />
	Morpheus = the god of dreams in Ovid&apos;s Metamorphoses.<br />
	<br />
	Niobe = a mortal turned into stone by the gods.<br />
	<br />
	Kali = destroyer of evil spirits.<br />
	<br />
	Rama Chandra = seventh avatar of Vishnu and/or a god of fertility.<br />
	<br />
	Sati = Hindu character connected to widows.</p>
	<p>SHIPS </p>
	<p>The Logos: <br />
	A hypostasis associated with divine wisdom, or the second person in the 
	Trinity.<br />
	<br />
	The Nebuchadnezzar: <br />
	Babylonian king whose name means &quot;the frontiers&quot;. </p>
	<p>The story makes numerous references to historical and literary myths, 
	including <a href="http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/People/rgs/alice-table.html">
	Alice&apos;s Adventures in Wonderland</a>, Judeo-Christian imagery and the novels 
	of William Gibson, especially
	<a href="http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0441569595/coolmel-20">
	Neuromancer</a>. Gibson popularized the concept of a world wide computer 
	network with a virtual reality interface, which was named &quot;the matrix&quot; in 
	his <a href="http://www.antonraubenweiss.com/gibson/gibson1.html">Sprawl 
	Trilogy</a>, a concept which was also used with the same name in the British 
	sci-fi series <a href="http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0056751/">Doctor Who</a>.
	</p>
	<p>Students of <a href="http://www.gnosis.org/">Gnosticism</a> will notice 
	many of its themes touched upon. Other motifs include the free will vs. fate 
	debate and the nature of reality, perception, <a href="http://www.wie.org">
	enlightenment</a>, and existence. In many ways The Matrix is about a kind of 
	reality enforcement . There are also vague references to
	<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhism">Buddhism</a> and
	<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daoism">Daoism</a> , with concepts of
	<a href="http://www.wie.org">Enlightenment/Nirvana</a> and rebirth. </p>
	<p>The Matrix has many cinematic influences. Its action scenes, with a 
	physics-defying style drawn directly from martial arts films, and the 
	rooftop chase from classic American movies, are notable. </p>
	<p>Additionally, there are notable influences from Japanese animation (<a href="http://en2.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime">anime</a>). 
	Both a scene almost at the end of the movie, where Neo&apos;s breathing seems to 
	buckle the fabric of reality in a corridor he is standing in, as well as the 
	&quot;psychic children&quot; scene in the Oracle &apos;s waiting room are evocative of 
	similar scenes from the 1980s anime classic
	<a href="http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094625/">Akira </a>. The title 
	sequence, the rooftop chase scene where an agent breaks a concrete tile on 
	the roof when landing after a jump, the scene late in the movie where a 
	character hides behind a column while pieces of it are blown away by 
	bullets, and a chase scene in a fruit market where shots hit watermelons, 
	are practically identical to shots in another anime science fiction classic,
	<a href="http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0301344/">Ghost in the Shell </a>. </p>
	<p>It should be noted that the reason given in the movie for computers 
	enslaving humans is implausible from a
	<a href="http://www.taftan.com/thermodynamics/">thermodynamic </a>point of 
	view. The chemical energy required to keep a human being alive is vastly 
	greater than the bio-electric energy that could be harvested. It would be 
	vastly more effective to burn the organic matter and power a conventional 
	electrical generator.
	<a href="http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/11.11/matrix.html">The 
	Wachowski&apos;s</a> original explanation was the machines were actually using 
	the humans&apos; brains as components in a massively parallel
	<a href="http://ieee-nns.org/">neural network</a> computer. Because they 
	felt non-technical viewers would have trouble understanding it, the writers 
	abandoned this concept in favor of the &quot;human power source&quot; explanation. </p>
</blockquote>

</body>
