--- 
wordpress_id: 1367
layout: post
title: Blogging
date: 2003-05-07 13:58:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=1367
---
I didn&apos;t mean to not write for a week! Really! Let&apos;s see. R and I have gotten serious about getting a house in the Seattle area. We spent Saturday day looking at houses that we found listed online and getting a sense of distances and things we didn&apos;t like about kinds of houses or neighborhoods. I called &apos;s mother, who is a semi-retired real estate agent, on Monday and got a reference to a good agent that she recommended for the north part of the city/county, since she works the other end and is mostly retired anyway. I&apos;ve called him and he&apos;s begun looking for places for us. He recommended a good mortgage broker to me. I then liquidated most of my original grant from 1997 (the only one currently worth any money) to get 10% down on whatever we get. That&apos;s kind of a big deal and makes us fairly commited to doing this. It&apos;s kind of sad that three years ago, I would have gotten three times as much cash for it but that&apos;s the way the world is... Other than that, work has been hell. I think I said "Fuck" or variants of it to my boss about ten or twelve times yesterday. Things like "Give me a fucking break!" or "You&apos;ve got to be fucking kidding if you think that&apos;s happening." Not a good sign. (<b><i>Note:</i></b> he speaks in the same vulgar tones so my swearing isn&apos;t an issue.) We went to a wonderful Beltane event at Mark and Nef&apos;s place on Saturday. They have a nice piece of property with a house and a fire circle on it and have folks out every year. People hung out and chatted. I got to fondle &apos;s swollen belly without getting slapped. We burned a wicker man at midnight. Fun stuff. Off to a meeting now.