---
author: admin
date: '2003-11-19 06:16:00'
layout: post
slug: having-and-keeping-secrets
status: publish
title: Having and Keeping Secrets
wordpress_id: '1990'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

Having and Keeping Secrets Some Words About Silence and The Hermetic Art
of Secrecy by Earl King, Jr. Nowadays, a certain impatience with, and
even contempt for, secrecy and secrets is widespread even (or perhaps
especially) among people who study magical, occult and esoteric
subjects. There are many reasons for this. One of them, I suppose, is a
natural irritation at having things kept secret from oneself. Another is
a clear sense of the various abuses to which secrecy, and promises of
secrecy, can be put. At the very least, secrecy can be an excellent
cover for bankruptcy. In an often-quoted remark, Aleister Crowley
complained that the Golden Dawn swore him to secrecy with mighty oaths,
and then revealed to him the names of the planets and the Hebrew
alphabet^1^. If this was all there was to it, the only reason for
persisting would be the one which led so many people to praise the
Emperor's invisible new clothes -- a disinclination to admit
unequivocally that one had been duped. This is one of the keys to the
use of secrecy as a tool of manipulation, and one that has been well
explored by sociologists and social psychologists.

1

There are, however, many perfectly practical reasons for requiring
secrecy as a condition of membership in a group, all of which have
arguments to justify them. It might be, for example, that certain
information could put the group or some of its members at risk if widely
known -- or that certain kinds of information could be dangerous to have
in general circulation. Or again, a group might depend on having a
monopoly on a certain skill -- thus we have trade secrets (which include
the secrets of professional spies and cryptographers). Related to this
is the use of secrecy to create internal cohesion and interdependency:
at its most benign, this is an educational (as well as marketing)
strategy that captures and directs the attention of students. I suppose
this was common enough in traditional crafts; some martial arts
traditions still use this as a teaching device. There is another way in
which secrecy is used as a teaching device, especially in apprenticeship
training. Certain kinds of activities are very hard to put into words,
and they are not learned well as long as one is relying on verbal
formulations. Mastery of a craft involves the ability to work at or
beyond the limits of verbal representations, and one way to foster that
ability is for the teacher to refuse to put the teaching into words.
This is why the rules of art are often passed on only after the
apprentice has worked at the skills. This is something of what Confucius
meant when he said that you can tell if people are worth teaching when,
if you show them one corner, they can grasp the other three.^2^

2.

This last reason for secrecy points us away from the realm of purely
worldly wisdom, and in another direction, toward that aspect of the
world that is everywhere shared but nowhere seen. There's an old story
about the psychologist who wanted to see what an ape would do in a human
habitat. He furnished a studio apartment, brought the ape in, installed
it in an easy chair, and then left. As soon as he left, he bent down to
look through the keyhole -- and saw the ape's eye looking out at him.
Sartre describes a similar situation -- the person peering through a
keyhole in a corridor, who suddenly hears a noise and realizes that
someone has been watching^3^. In either case, a person who was at the
center of a scene suddenly experiences a vertiginous moment of being
thrust to the periphery -- a moment of being vulnerable to the defining
gaze of another. This is why people who look through keyholes prefer to
do so in secret. But it is also true of any situation in which one feels
that to be perceived is to be misperceived (as teenagers suppose when
they keep secrets from their parents) -- or perhaps perceived all too
accurately (as parents suppose when they try to find them out). Because
the gaze of the other is always a defining gaze, then, secrecy and
dissimulation are sometimes adopted to prevent this gaze from finding
its mark, that seeing they may see not. This, in fact, is one
interpretation of magical invisibility. The protagonist of Dion
Fortune's *Sea Priestess* is at one point reproached by his censorious
sister, who is sure that he is behaving scandalously. She warns him that
if he scandalizes the servants, they may all leave. He answers that
servants never leave when there is a scandal afoot, because they all
want to see how it turns out^4^. In a large household of the traditional
type, in fact, the denizens of the "upstairs" world are actors in a
drama for which the "downstairs" world provides both the stage hands and
a significant component of the audience -- as, at the same time, the
downstairs world can provide a spectacle for those who gaze (and
intervene) from above. Whenever ideas, or thoughts, or feelings, or
relationships, get onto the public stage, they stop being what they were
and become, in a sense, staged. They are reduced to their surfaces. (A
lyric poem is one thing when you read it to yourself in solitude, and
something else entirely when you see it recited by a character in a
play.) If such things are unavailable to a public gaze (or the gaze of a
public), however, they cannot be summed up and dismissed in a glance. If
they are approached at all, they must be approached by participation. If
they are, then, to have a propaganda, it must be a propaganda of
difficulty. This is why some philosophers are driven to develop new and
even difficult modes of expression -- and why, once that philosopher's
work becomes fashionable, these modes of expression are transformed into
the current jargon of the chattering classes. Another reason for secrecy
is related to the well-known problem of sincerity and
self-consciousness. To say something, for anyone over a certain age, is
to enact saying something. To say it too well is to call it into doubt.
If he says, "I love you" with polish and aplomb, who will believe him?
But if his voice trembles a bit, perhaps, and he finds it hard to speak
clearly, then certainly he must be sincere. But perhaps he knows this --
perhaps he is putting on this charming diffidence. How can we get him to
express himself honestly, and be sure that he is not endeavoring to
create an appearance? We can't. Manifestation is appearance. At some
point we must be satisfied with gestures and tokens, signs and
indications. To be disappointed by a gift is to have supposed that a
gift can and should by its nature give magical access to a heightened
reality, rather than to have accepted it as a representation or token of
reality. It is when we accept a gift, a gesture, or a word, as a token
that we can accept it with its meaning still held within it. Respecting
secrecy, then, is knowing when to stop a potentially infinite regress of
explication, to express (or accept) an intention in a summary gesture or
formula, and move on. It is the secrecy of old friends, and old couples,
who know what does not need to be said, and how not to say it. At the
same time, it establishes and fortifies that world of relationship,
ensuring that even should they penetrate the physical confines of the
household, for example, no spy, reporter, or dog that's friend to man
would be able to dig up and make apparent what everyone inside knows.
And yet newcomers, growing into the household, would learn to sense its
depths in its silences. This resignation in the face of the constant
polarization of outer and inner is in itself a teaching tool, summed up
in the maxim that to reveal is to re-veil. Nothing can be revealed
unless it is given a veil, an appearance. This is the inner or esoteric
sense of the Aristotelian claim that all beings have bodies (as North
Wind makes clear to Diamond in George MacDonald's novel)^5^. This is why
the Golden Dawn exacted a pledge to maintain the veil between the Inner
and Outer Orders -- because without a veil, there could be no manifest
connection at all.^6^

3

Up to this point, I have discussed secrecy as it appears in dealing with
people in a practical or business sense, and in the realm of more
personal relationships. Though these are relevant enough to secrecy in
esoteric circles, they do not reach some of the more specifically
esoteric reasons for secrecy. To do this, I have to say something,
finally, about the word "esoteric", and what I mean by it. A thing is
not esoteric because it is secret or kept hidden. It is esoteric because
its existence is in some sense unmanifest, private, and by its very
nature not available for examination from the outside: it is only
available to participation, not, ultimately, merely to examination. In
other words, the realm of the esoteric is, before anything else, the
realm of consciousness, of experience. Now, from what we might call the
ordinary point of view,consciousness is so transparent that it is
practically invisible; from the point of view of esoteric disciplines,
it is this invisible realm, and its relationship to the world, that is
to be the very theme and center of attention. Oddly enough, it is the
very action of consciousness that ordinarily makes consciousness
invisible. The realm of consciousness is the unnoticed interface between
subject and object, an interface that ordinarily seems infinitesimal.
Usually the only question is, to paraphrase Humpty Dumpty, who's to be
subject. Who's to see, and who's to be seen. But as long as this stance
defines the situation, the gate to the esoteric realm is barred. It is
when the focus shifts -- from the polarization of subject and object to
the moment of experience out of which subject and object arise -- that
the doors swing open. This is why keeping silence is one of the four
magical virtues. To speak too soon about one's magical work is like
pulling up seedlings to help them grow faster. To speak too soon can be
to cast oneself into the realm of the contest between persecutor and
persecuted, where one attacks by defining, by speaking the definitive
word, and defends by putting on a show of being what one is seen to be,
like Sartre's waiter, who pretends to be an actor acting the part of a
waiter, and thus eludes "being" a waiter.^7^ The puzzles and enigmas of
certain Hermetic texts are a manifestation of esoteric secrecy and its
possible corruption. Their proper esoteric function is not to give us an
answer, but to wake us up to the nature of the answer we seek. The
common jokes about the great Master who responds to a question about the
meaning of life with some answer like "a carrot", or "42", play
implicitly upon this point. The meaning of life is not the solution to a
code, or a problem in translation or arithmetic. The meaning of life is
what makes life meaningful. The trade secret of mastery of life is not
something one can find by looking it up in the back of the book. The
point of an enigma is not the answer, but the expansion that comes as a
result of the work done in solving it. In an important sense, to focus
on the answer is to defend oneself from the task of transformation, and,
even more, from the transforming effects of the task. This is why
esoteric systems often have slippage in them, and why I have left the
secret fivefold structure of this discussion in seeming disarray. The
mystery that cannot be expressed (because it is a mystery of inwardness)
is expressed in the ceremony of its secrecy that marks those who share
it with a common sign -- that of membership in the community that
recognizes the mystery in that specific secret. It speaks through our
silence. Dion Fortune divides the mysteries into the lesser, the
psychophysical techniques kept within the lodges, and the greater, which
those techniques are used to reveal, and adds that the greater mysteries
could be proclaimed from the housetops, and not be betrayed.^8^ A
Japanese psychiatrist, in the course of a perceptive discussion of the
place of reserve in personal relations, comments on a surprisingly
similar passage in which the Japanese Noh esthetician Zeami discusses
the secrecy that surrounds the Noh theatrical houses^9^. This emphasis
on the importance of secrets [referring to Jesus' injunction to pray in
secret] is not limited to thinkers narrowly defined as religious or
ethical. Among Zeami's most famous pronouncements on the Noh theater is
the following:

> *Know the concealed flower. "What is concealed is the flower. What is
> not concealed cannot be the flower." To know this distinction is the
> flower, and among all flowers this flower is the most important. From
> the beginning, the respective houses in the various ways and arts have
> called all matters pertaining to their disciplines secrets, precisely
> because. great work is done by making these matters secret.*

Some may find this suspicious, wondering why on earth it is so important
to keep these things secret. Some may even be annoyed, feeling that it
smacks of arcane mysticism - of privileging secrets for their own sake.
As if to answer such doubts, Zeami continues with this:

> *However, if what these houses call secrets are revealed, they are
> nothing of great note. But those who say that they are nothing of note
> do so precisely because they have not yet comprehended the matter of
> secrets.*

For Zeami, secrets did not exist because what they made secret was
important. It was the fact of making something secret itself that was
important. This is not to say that Zeami is simply recommending
mystification as a way of increasing the weight or value of some piece
of information. Rather, what may seem to be mystification is a way of
making that information symbolic because it is hidden. Because it is
hidden, it cannot be explained. Because it cannot be said, it stands in
for, or acts as a pointer to, the unsayable. We map the extra, tacit,
inarticulable dimension into the ordinary realm by the use of secrets.
Or: the secret is the diagonal that allows the third, inarticulate
dimension to be mapped into the plane, the domain of words.

4

The silence that enfolds something kept unsaid points to the unsayable.
By being wrapped in silence, what is arcane (kept hidden) comes to
participate in what is esoteric (by its nature inexpressible). The
secret becomes a symbol of the mystery, participating in what it points
to, by the way in which it points to it. There is a story, perhaps
apocryphal, of a curious person quizzing a statesman about some secret
matter of general interest. The statesman leaned over and asked, in a
confiding manner, "Can you keep a secret?" "Certainly," said his
interlocutor. Replied the statesman, "So can I." Cut off from its
context, this story is more than a witty rebuke: it carries almost the
quality of a koan. Wake up, it seems to say, to what you are asking, and
how. What is this curiosity, this emptiness you seek to fill with
gossip? A thing can be said because it can be caught in the net of
words; a thought is thinkable because it can be articulated and
specified. But once said, once articulated, it is only the shell, the
husk, of what went into its articulation. It is merely the vestige, the
footprint, of the thinking, the articulating act, which itself was
tacit. But before the object of though emerges (with the subject as its
beholder) there is thinking. Before speech there is silence -- and
silence points backward, within, toward the origin, toward what only
silence can express. In her exquisite study of rose and rosary
symbolism, Eithne Wilkins describes a painting by Filippino Lippi "of
the Virgin in the enclosed rose-garden: she kneels before the divine
infant on whose naked body an angel -- one of *five* -- is pouring
rose-petals, and the Child has a finger to his lips. This has been
interpreted as meaning: "I am the Word" -- one might add: a word reaped
in silence."^10^ If you had remained silent, says the old proverb (with
that double sense, worldly and philosophical, common to such proverbs)
you would have remained a philosopher. "The true Magician must
understand his tools and, in periods of silence, he must contemplate
words as one of them."^11^ The word that is sufficient unto the wise is,
surely, a word reaped in silence. **Notes** 1. "Much that was once
common knowledge has been gathered up and confined under the initiate's
oath of secrecy. It is Crowley's jibe at his teachers that they bound
him to secrecy with terrible oaths and then "confided the Hebrew
alphabet to his safe keeping." Thus Dion Fortune, in *The Mystical
Qabalah* (London: Ernest Benn Limited, 1966; originally 1935; p. 27).
The phrasing has been compressed and tightened in the re-telling;
Crowley's account, in *The Confessions of Aleister Crowley: An
Autohagiography* (London: Jonathan Cape, 1969 [first two parts
originally 1929], pp. 177-178) is at once more diffuse and more nuanced.
2. *Lun Yü* [*Analects*] VII:8; this does not mean that he held anything
back from his students (cf. VII:23). 3. See Sartre's discussion of "The
Look" in *Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology*
(New York: Washington Square Press, 1968 (Hazel E. Barnes, trans.), pp.
347 ff.). 4.*Sea Priestess* (London: The Aquarian Press, 1957), p. 20.
5. George MacDonald, *At the Back of the North Wind* (London: J.M. Dent
& Sons Ltd., 1967 [originally 1870], p 322. 6. See Israel Regardie, ed.,
*The Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic*(Phoenix, Arizona: Falcon
Press, 1984), vol. 7, p. 42. 7. Sartre, *op. cit.*, pp. 101 ff. 8.
Fortune, *Mystical Qabalah* (*op. cit.*). 9. Takeo Doi, *The Anatomy of
Self: The Individual Versus Society. Tokyo: Kodansha International*,
1988; 110-111. 10. Eithne Wilkins, *The Rose-Garden Game: The Symbolic
Background to the European Prayer-Beads* (London: Victor Gollancz Ltd.,
1969), p. 115. 11. Regardie, *op. cit.*, vol. 3, p. 54.
