--- 
layout: post
title: Prison
published: true
meta: 
  ljID: "2895"
  no_lj: "1"
  _podPressPostSpecific: a:6:{s:15:"itunes:subtitle";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:14:"itunes:summary";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:15:"itunes:keywords";s:17:"##WordPressCats##";s:13:"itunes:author";s:10:"##Global##";s:15:"itunes:explicit";s:7:"Default";s:12:"itunes:block";s:7:"Default";}
tags: 
- Daily Life
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
type: post
status: publish
---
I spent about 11 hours or so at McNeil Island yesterday, which is one of the Washington State Prisons. I went out there with <lj user="m7o7n7k"> for the Samhain celebration of the Wiccan group there. M7o7n7k is the sponsor of the group and generally goes out there on a monthly basis to lead a study group. Each religious group is allowed to pick an annual holiday (like Christmas Day) for a banquet for family and visitors to come out to and this group picked Samhain as their holiday.</lj>

We did some basic ritual work with them to celebrate the sabbat almost as soon as we arrived. Afterwards, we hung out for a little while before inmates had to go to various other tasks. A short while later, a group of them was able to return and M7o7n7k and I were able to spend a couple of hours talking to them about spiritual issues and I was able to get a bit of a religious history for each of the main members of the group. In the late afternoon, they set up for the banquet and then we attended the dinner and were otherwise involved when family showed up. I was also able to interface with the chaplain a bit and discuss issues with religious expression in prison with the inmates.

I'll be going up with M7o7n7k in a few weeks for the normal study group/class and taking the volunteer training to continue to work with them. I expect that I'll go up on a regular basis. All of the guys came to paganism on the inside of the system so they don't know what the pagan community is like and they haven't had access to a lot of knowledge or resources. A few of them have gotten some books via mail order or inter-library loan but that's about it. One of the things that I want to help them do is get a good sense of the possibilities in pagan practice and how they can develop their own practice. M7o7n7k has been working with them to that end.

Frankly, the guys seem to be a fairly lively and enthusiastic group. All of them were polite, nice and relatively well spoken towards me and seemed to be glad to have me there. I don't know what any of them are doing time for in any detail and it really doesn't matter. They are trying to better themselves through spirituality and they are members of the same religious community that I've identified with for more than 14 years now. They definitely feel marginalized in regards to the community and it is understandable. They are in prison after all. Many of them have written to local groups to try to talk to people or set up lines of communication and, without exception to my knowledge, none of them have received a response. While I find this understandable since people don't necessarily want to deal with convicts, I also find it troubling. Once you put a face to these people, you understand that they are walking a hard road, regardless of how they wound up there. They shouldn't be forgotten by the community.
