---
author: admin
date: '2003-12-29 12:34:00'
layout: post
slug: jewsmas
status: publish
title: Jewsmas!
wordpress_id: '2101'
categories:
- Humor
- Society
- Spirituality
---

Sweet!! [http://www.jewsmas.org/](http://www.jewsmas.org/)
The Story of Jewsmas
![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/SantaJewsmas.jpg)Once upon a
time, there was a beautiful holiday celebrated by the Jewish people,
called Chanukah, or the Festival of Lights. Each year, the Jewish people
gathered to remember a time over 2,000 years ago, when a small band of
Jewish fighters rose up and drove the Syrians out of Israel and
reclaimed their freedom.When these fighters returned to the holy city of
Jerusalem, they found their temple defiled and used as a pig sty and
they found the Eternal Flame of the temple extinguished. They cleared
the rubble and swine and even found a small cruse of olive oil bearing a
holy seal, but sadly, there was only enough oil to burn for one day.
They lit the flame anyhow, and by a miracle, that flame burned not for
one day, but for eight days, enough time that new oil could be made and
the eternal flame could burn unquenched. In memory of that wondrous
time, each year in mid-December, on the 25th day of the Jewish month of
Kislev, Jews light candles for eight nights, filling their houses with
light.But a great misfortune was to befall Chanukah. It fell near the
Christian holiday of Christmas, and so when well-meaning Christians
wanted to say something besides "Merry Christmas" to their Jewish
friends, they grasped for the nearest holiday and said "Happy Chanukah".
Jewish children saw the presents their Christian friends received and
asked why they didn't get any, and so well-meaning Jewish parents
started to give *Chanukah presents*. And slowly Chanukah began to
dissolve and degrade into little more than a Jewish version of
Christmas. *But we know that Chanukah is not the Jewish Christmas!*No,
we must reclaim Chanukah for what it is: a celebration of freedom, faith
and miracles from G-d. And to do that, we create a new holiday, the
Jewish Christmas. From this time forward, each year on the first
Saturday after Christmas, Jews and Christians shall gather together and
celebrate **Jewsmas**. On Jewsmas, we decorate a house plant with
colored lights, we eat fondue, and we play dreidel drinking games. On
Jewsmas, we take gifts from beneath the decorated plant and give them to
our Jewish and Christian friends alike. On Jewsmas, we drink
Manischevitz wine with soda water. On Jewsmas, we celebrate the
knowledge that **Chanukah is not the goddamn Jewish Christmas**, so
leave it the hell alone!
