---
author: admin
date: '2003-11-25 06:36:00'
layout: post
slug: hellish
status: publish
title: Hellish
wordpress_id: '2004'
categories:
- Daily Life
---
My boss scheduled a people review meeting at 8:00 AM this morning (Monday) for all of his leads for our people. I spaced on this (I mean, an eight am meeting on a Monday for the love of God!!) but he made up for it. The last part of it (after he spent four hours working with the test managers on it) was to finish it up this afternoon. This was scheduled to be from 4:00 to 6:00 PM...at about 7:00 PM, we ordered pizza. I left around 8:30 PM to go home...

I'm pretty glad I spaced on the 8:00 AM meeting now... Needless to say, I'm not rushing in exceedingly early tomorrow. Fuck it.

I have Wednesday off from work so I'm looking forward to a long weekend.

On the suck note, Monk is getting called away for duty for two months on almost no notice. So much for a lot of group ritual work. Sarastro and I will survive but it sucks. Also, Monk is officially the vounteer at McNeil Island, the prison that I've been doing work at with him and I'm not scheduled for my volunteer training until mid-January. This means that between now and then, I probably can't go to the prison on my own and it leaves the guys there high and dry.

It looks like I didn't get around to writing on Saturday about our visit. Oops.

To recap, Monk and I went out to McNeil Island early Saturday morning. I met him at his apartment at 6:00 AM and we drove down and caught the prison's ferry out by 7:30. The guys showed up around 8:30 or so. The group is officially a Wiccan group and most of the inmates in it primarily identiy as Wiccan. Their interests are fairly wide ranging though.

Monk and I proceeded to talk to them about issues and then tag-teamed a short class on meditation and its role. Monk presented part of his material drawing from some Buddhist meditation and I added points when possible. I then presented from Ben Rowe's <a href="http://www.hermetic.com/browe-archive/ashort.htm">Short Course on Scrying</a> (the pdf version is more complete and up to date) as it seemed to be the most relevent to the practice of a prisoner. It has a section of basic relaxation and energy work and then on creating an astral sacred space that one can do ritual work within. Since prisoners are unable to have freedom of space and movement, this seemed ideal. Monk and I stayed almost three hours and then hurried back to make our ferry back to the mainland.

I've been planning on going back for their Yule Sabbat ritual around the time of the Solstice. We'll see if it happens now.
