---
author: admin
date: '2003-12-14 12:38:00'
layout: post
slug: iamblichus-and-dreams
status: publish
title: Iamblichus and Dreams
wordpress_id: '2069'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

**IAMBLICHEAN DREAM THEORY**\
 *John F. Finamore, University of Iowa*

Robert Berchman in an earlier paper in this collection has discussed the
dream theory of Philo. Berchman traces the history of the interpretation
of dreams from the early Greek poets to Plato, Aristotle, and the
Stoics, and shows how Philo in his *de Somniis*made use of this
tradition in his own middle-Platonic dream theory. I intend to examine
how dream theory has evolved in the later neoplatonic tradition as
evidenced in the *de Mysteriis* of Iamblichus. Iamblichus borrows from
the same tradition as Philo but, because of his expansive metaphysical
hierarchy, makes more distinctions about the kinds of dreams termed
*theopemptoi*(god-sent). Nonetheless, the heart of Iamblichean dream
theory is remarkably similar to Philo's, suggesting a relatively smooth
tradition of exegesis between the first and fourth centuries C.E.

Iamblichus, like all Platonists, had to come to grips with what Plato
had said about dreams. Plato left the path open to belief in divination
through dreams. In the *Republic* 571c3-572b9, he discusses the effect
the rational soul can have on dreams. If the rational soul is asleep,
dreams aroused by our lower natures result, dreams of incest,
bestiality, murder, etc. If however the rational soul has control over
the lower parts, even in sleep it can carry on its thinking and planning
unimpeded. It grasps truth and is without unlawful visions. Plato
considers the topic twice in the *Timaeus*. At 45d3-46a2, Plato says
that dreams are images (*phantasmata*) internal to the body. At 71
e2-72b5, Plato takes up the topic of divination in dreams, which he
considers possible when the power of thought (*phronesis*) is shackled
in sleep. Dreamers cannot understand these prophetic dreams while they
are having them (because their rational souls are overcome), but they or
a diviner can interpret the dreams after they have awakened. It would
seem, then, that Platonic interpreters who wished to argue that dreams
provide true visions could argue either or both of two positions: that
dreams impart truth either when the rational soul is alert and
controlling the images or when the rational soul is subdued and the
images are received without its awareness. Platonic interpreters could
also take heart from the fact that Socrates had divinely inspired dreams
of his own that he interpreted himself. In *Crito* 44a10-b2 Socrates
dreams that a woman dressed in white tells him the day of his death; in
*Phaedo* 60e4-61b7 Socrates interprets a dream that causes him to take
up the writing of poetry.

Berchman (in section 11.2) has shown that Philo divided dreams into
various categories. A major division of types of dreams is into those
that are *theopemptoi*, true, and divinatory and those that arise from
the soul itself and fill the sleeper's faculty of discursive reason
(*dianoia*) with false images and unreliable images (*Somn.*2.162).
Iamblichus in *Myst.* 3.2^1^ makes the same division into dreams that
are *theopemptoi* and those that are not. This is not surprising since
such a division represents an attempt to combine Plato's own statements
about dreams in the *Republic* and the *Timaeus*. Human dreams that are
not god-sent (*anthropinoi oneiroi*), Iamblichus says, come from the
soul itself (103.2-4), just as the *Republic* would have it. They are
set in motion either by our own thoughts and reasonings or by our daily
cares and whatever our phantasiai have aroused (103.4-6).^2^ This
disjunction recalls Plato's distinction in the *Republic* between the
rational soul (*logistikon*, 571c4 and d7) and the irrational. When we
sleep with our rational soul alert and in control, Plato tells us, we
are most likely to grasp the truth (572a7-b1). Thus, Iamblichus says
that these sorts of dreams may be true or false and sometimes chance
upon reality but often do not (103.6-8).

Iamblichus, like Philo, accepts different kinds of god-sent dreams.
Plato's writings here presented a difficulty, for in the *Timaeus* Plato
accepted divinatory dreams only when the rational principle is shackled
in sleep or when the person is under some form of enthusiasm (*Tim.*
71e2-6). Both Philo (*Somn.* 2.1) and Iamblichus,^3^ however, count
enthusiasm as only one form (the lowest) of *theopemptoi oneiroi*, for
they both see the higher forms of divination in dreams as occurring when
the dreamer's intellect (*nous*) is fully aware of what is occurring
(*Somn.* 1.1 and *Myst.* 3.2, 104.10-12). Their claim is possible, I
suspect, not only because Socrates had divine dreams of which he was
fully aware (as was mentioned earlier) but also because the passage in
the *Republic* had claimed that the soul could see truths when the
rational principle was alert (*Rep*. 572a7-b1). Iamblichus seems to
augment Plato's words in the needed way in the beginning of *de Myst.*
3.3, when he argues that it is easier to free our souls from the body
when we are asleep:

> When awake, we often make use of the life in common with the body,
> unless we free ourselves from it completely by pure reasoning in
> intellection and thought. In sleep, we free ourselves completely [from
> the body] as though from chains attached to us, and we make use of a
> life separated from generation.^4^ [106.6-9].

The echoes of the *Republic* are clear enough. Plato had emphasized that
the person who has trained reason to command the irrational impulses in
the day is the one who controls those impulses and keeps them from
interfering with dreams at night. Iamblichus takes the argument one step
further and says that the same person who can do this can be fully
conscious of *theopemptoi* dreams.

Indeed Iamblichus is willing to blur the distinctions of waking and
sleeping for *theopemptoi* dreams. He says that such dreams occur at any
of several ideal times: when sleep is slipping away, when we are just
beginning to wake, when we are between sleeping and waking,. and even
when we are fully awake (103.8-14).^5^ The emphasis on the half-awake or
fully awake state indicates a nod in Plato's direction. We need some
degree of alertness to be rational. But how does one "dream" when awake?

Iamblichus' answer implies that *theopemptoi* dreams involve some sort
of trance. These dreams must, by definition, be sent by the gods. Since
the gods cannot themselves descend into our realm,^6^ Iamblichus tells
us that they send either an invisible and incorporeal pneuma (103.15) or
a bright and peaceful light (104.4-5). In either case, the dreamer is
aware of the pneuma or light (although there are different degrees of
awareness, as we shall see) and receives a true, divinatory dream. The
dreamer is therefore taken over by the gods. As Iamblichus states in
*Myst.* 3.23, the cause of the mantic dream is not from us (155.8).^7^
Its truth is not of our doing, but the truth illuminates us from itself
(155.16-18). The divination therefore "is from the outside
(*exothen)*^8^ from the gods and it of its own power, when it wishes and
how it wishes, reveals with good will what will be" (155.18-156.3).
These *theopemptoi* dreams, then, are caused by external factors that
set up some sort of trance in the dreamer, whether the dreamer is awake
or asleep.

What Iamblichus has in mind is further described in *Myst.* 3.14, a
chapter on the functioning of enthusiasm. In this type of divination
divine light is showered upon the soul's ethereal vehicle.^9^
"Thereupon, divine images take hold of the imaginative power in us"
(132.13-14).^10^ The effect of this is to allow the subject to be
conscious of what is occurring, because the rational soul is not
affected by the divine light, but to allow the gods to control the
images that the subject "sees" (133.3-8). Thus, to return to dreams, the
dreamer does not control the images in the psychic vehicle; the gods do.
But the more alert the rational soul is, the greater awareness the
dreamer has of the dream.

Thus, both Philo and Iamblichus divide dreams into those that are
*theopemptoi* and those that arise from within the dreamer's soul. Both
also discern different classes of *theopemptoi* dreams. Philo divides
these dreams into three kinds.^11^ Philo's classification is based on
three factors: the source of the dream, the level of psyche used by the
dreamer, and the degree of clarity of the divination received. Dreams of
the first type are sent by god (*to theion* in *Somn.* 1.1 and *theos*
in 2.2), are immediately clear (2.2-3), and hence are sent to those like
Isaac who preserve the good in themselves and apportion it to their
*logismos* (2.9-10). The second division of *theopemptoi* dreams is from
the soul of the universe (1.2 and 2.2), involves the human intellect and
is less clear (1.2, cf. 2.2). The third type originates in the soul of
the dreamer (2.1) but is a form of enthusiasm (*enthousiosa*, 2.1) and
so is similar to Iamblichus' conception of enthusiastic dream in which
the dreamer is unaware of what is occurring. Hence, the dream is
unclear, involves a "deep and profound riddle" (*to bathu kai katakores
echein to ainigma*), and requires interpretive skill (2.4).

Iamblichus divides *theopemptoi* dreams into more classifications than
Philo does. The more intricate metaphysical universe of Iamblichean
neoplatonism requires a greater variety of dreams.^12^ The sources of
the dreams may be the superior classes (angels, heroes, demons, purified
souls, etc.), the visible gods, the intellectual gods, the intelligible
gods, or the One itself. The soul of the dreamer may be involved with
only its irrational nature, with its rational nature, or with its
intellect. The clarity of the divination would necessarily differ both
with the source and the level of psychic involvement. Nevertheless,
there are certain important features of similarity between Philo's and
Iamblichus' systems.

We have already seen indications of a kind of enthusiasm similar to
Philo's third class of dream in Iamblichus' *Myst.* 3.14. Further
evidence is provided in chapter 3.24, where Iamblichus is again
discussing divination. He considers a kind of divination in which the
senses are taken over but not by human images (157.8-11), in which the
invocations used at the rite of divination awaken neither the
inspiration^13^ of the *dianoia* nor the corporeal passions in the
recipient (157.13-14), and in which those who are simpler and young are
better suited to receiving the descending pneuma that will produce the
divination (157.16-20). Here we clearly have a recipient whose rational
soul is intended to be undeveloped so that it will not interfere with
the divine images received by the soul's vehicle. Such a recipient will
not be alert to the meaning of the divination but will act merely as a
receptacle for the divination, which will be interpreted by others.^14^

Iamblichus in *Myst.* 3.2 displays one way in which he increases the
types of *theopemptoi* dreams. At 104.4-12 he delineates two types that
are differentiated only by the level of psychic involvement of the
dreamer.

> Sometimes when a bright and peaceful light is shining, the vision of
> the eyes is checked and shut off, although it was in force before. The
> other senses are alert and perceive how the gods are revealed in the
> light, hear what they say, and (by attending closely) know what they
> are doing. A still more perfect [type of divination] is seen when the
> vision sees, when the intellect, having been strengthened, follows the
> activities, and when the spectators become involved in the
> contemplation.

Here Iamblichus first describes (lines 4-9) a dream state intermediary
between Philo's second and third type of dream. Unlike the third type,
the dreamer is aware of the god's presence, words, and actions; unlike
the second type, the dreamer's senses (rather than intellect) are
involved. Iamblichus then describes (lines 10-12) a dream state similar
to Philo's second type of dream, in which not only the senses (including
vision this time) but also the intellect have become involved.

In the passage just discussed Iamblichus does not mention the divinity
to which the dreamer becomes attached. From elsewhere in the *de
Mysteriis* it is clear (as one would expect) that the higher the
divinity, the purer and more clear the divination received.^15^
Iamblichus sheds further light on this issue in *Myst.* 3.3, a chapter
which presents a hierarchy of five types of divination based upon the
source of the divination and the level of psychic involvement. This is
not a complete account of all possible *theopemptoi* dreams, nor does
Iamblichus intend it as such. At the lower end of the scale, for
example, it leaves out enthusiasm-type dreams and begins instead with
dreams in which the dreamer's intellect is engaged.

In the first type (106.15-19), the dreamer's intellect contemplates *ta
onta* while the soul enfolds (*periechei*) the logoi of all existing
things into itself. By *ta onta* Iamblichus means, of course, the Forms,
which reside at the level of the Demiurgic Intellect; the *logoi* are
the active reason principles of the Demiurge at work within the
cosmos.^16^ In *de An*. 365.22-366.5, Iamblichus explains his theory of
the soul as a substance existing at a lower level than and being of a
different kind from the souls of the gods and other superior beings. One
of the defining characteristics of the human soul is that it is the
totality of universal reasoning principles (*to pleroma ton katholou
logon*, 3 66.1-2). In *Protr*. 22.5-6, Iamblichus says that the soul
surrounds (*periechein*) these principles.^17^ Thus, although the human
soul is inferior to divine souls, it has within itself the logoi by
which it can recognize the Demiurgic *logoi* and, through them, the
Forms themselves. The passage from the *de Mysteriis* shows that
Iamblichus' dream theory depends upon his metaphysical theories. The
soul exists at a lower rank (*taxis*) and possesses *logoi* appropriate
to its rank. By these *logoi* and with divine aid the soul grasps the
Demiurgic *logoi*. As a result, the dreamer comes to know future events
as evidenced in those divine *logoi*. (This is a neoplatonic
reinterpretation of stoic *sympatheia*.)

In the remaining types of *theopemptoi* dreams that Iamblichus
describes, the soul unites with higher divinities and the divination
itself improves. The second type is said to make a more perfect
divination (106.19-107.5). The intellectual part of the soul unites with
the visible gods,^18^ and the gods fill the soul with knowledge of
future events that the soul discovers with its own thoughts (*ennoiai*).
In the third type (107.5-10) the dreamer's soul unites with the
intellectual gods^19^ and receives the totality of intellections
(*pleromata ton noeseon*) from which comes true divination. In the
fourth type (107.10-16), the soul interweaves its intellectual and
divine parts to even higher beings (i.e., to the intelligible gods) and
receives even purer images about these gods, about substances
incorporeal in themselves, and about intelligibles (*noeta*). Finally,
in the fifth type (107.16-108.3), the soul leads the *logoi* of existing
things to their causes (i.e., to the intelligible gods and the summit of
the intelligible realm^20^ and receives knowledge (*gnosis*) of what
will be. Here the soul, existing out of time, attains a synoptic view of
things existing in time and even shares in the rank (*taxis*) of the
intelligible gods themselves.^21^

Iamblichus' dream theory is, then, similar to Philo's but much more
elaborate because of the exigencies of the neoplatonic universe. Like
Philo, Iamblichus thinks that some dreams are *theopemptoi* while others
originate from ourselves. Like Philo, he subdivides the *theopemptoi*
dreams into several categories. Whereas Philo delineated only three
types of *theopemptoi* dreams, Iamblichus envisions more
classifications. There are enthusiasm-type dreams in which the dreamer
acts as a mere receptacle for the images of the gods and is completely
unaware of what is occurring, as well as similar dreams in which the
irrational, sensitive soul of the dreamer is aware of what is going on
but the dreamer's intellect is not involved. Once the dreamer's
intellect is alert to the dream visions, even higher types of
*theopemptoi* dreams and clearer forms of divination occur. In some, the
dreamer's soul contemplates the Forms; in others it is linked to the
visible gods, or to the intellectual gods, or to the intelligible gods,
or even to the summit of the intelligible realm, the One itself.

I do not mean to suggest in this paper that Iamblichus read and used
Philo's *de Somniis*. Just as Philo made use of contemporary
middle-Platonic theories to establish his system, so too Iamblichus used
and adapted the theories current in his day. Those theories would have
included middle-Platonic writings similar to Philo's. What is remarkable
is that the dream theories of Philo and his middle-Platonic
contemporaries changed so little in the two hundred years between
Philo's death and Iamblichus' birth.

**Notes**

\1. I shall cite from the edition of E. des Places (Paris 1966) but
retain Parthey's page numbers.

\2. There is a similarity, too, to *Tim.* 45e4-46a2, where dreams arise
from motions caused when we were awake and that remain after our eyes
are closed. Hence, we dream of things we did when we were awake.

\3. I shall discuss Iamblichus' view of enthusiasm shortly.

\4. Reading *geneseos* with Ficino. The manuscripts have *gnooseos*,
which des Places retains. If we follow the manuscripts, we must take
*gnoseos* with *zoei*, not with *kechorismenei*, and translate "the
separated [i.e., from body] life of knowledge." The genitive with
kechorismenei seems more natural Greek to me (Iamblichus used it in
106.5), but neither reading alters my point here. A.R. Sodano,
Giamblico: I Misteri Egiziani (Milan 1984), 412, defends Ficino's
reading. On the "double life," see Sodano 287 and (with des Places 101
note 2) P. Festugiere, *La Revelation d'Hermes Trismegiste*, vol. 3, 192
note 2.

\5. Later, at 104.13-105.3, Iamblichus states that these are the very
conditions that are most suitable for receiving the gods. See des
Places' note 3 *ad loc*. and Sodano, op. cit. (note 4), 284-285.

\6. *Myst.* 1.12, 42.6-17. The gods do not descend, but they do send
their "illumination" (*ellampsis*) to us (40.19-41.4). See des Places'
note 2 *ad loc*. It is interesting to note that Philo, too, does not
speak of god descending in the context of these dreams, but of god
sending (*epipempein*) images in sleep (*Somn.* 1.1), of our intellect
moving with that of the universe (2.2), or of the soul moving from
itself (*ex heautes he psuche kinoumene*, 2.1). The notion may be
implicit in the very word *theopemptos*, "sent by god."

\7. *Ouch hoti ex hemon to kai exothen*, i.e., the mantic dream is not
even partly from us and partly from outside. It is completely from
outside of us.

\8. See also *Myst.* 3.24, 157.18 and 158.2.

\9. The vehicle of the soul is the body intermediary between the soul
itself and the physical body. It is, among other things, the seat of
imagination (*phantasia*) and the means by which the soul may be
reunited with the gods in theurgical rites. See my *Iamblichus and the
Theory of the Vehicle of the Soul* (Chico, California 1985), chapters 1
and 4.

\10. Cf. *Myst.* 3.24, 157.9-11: no human images are set in motion in
divination.

\11. See Berchman's article, above, section 11.2.

\12. For a good overview of the Iamblichean universe, see the
introduction to J. M. Dillon, *Iamblichi Chalcidensis in Platonis
Dialogos Commentariorum Fragmenta* (Leiden 1973), 29-52.

\13. All the manuscripts have *epipnoias* (" inspirations"). It is
tempting to read *epinoias* ('thoughts"). These rational thoughts would
contrast more neatly with the *pathe* ("passions") in the recipient.
Thus, in this kind of divination, neither the rational nor the
irrational soul would be alert. There is, however, neither need nor
sufficient reason to change the manuscripts' reading.

\14. This type of enthusiasm is probably also referred to in *Myst.*
3.2, 103.14-104.4, where the recipient is aware of the pneuma but where
Iamblichus says nothing about the intellect being involved. The fact
that the pneuma is said to remove the passions from the recipient's soul
and body (104.5-7) also suggests a person without a strong enough
rational soul to keep alert during the divination. If I am correct, then
Sodano is wrong when he says that this is a dream of a theurgist, *op.
cit.* (note 4) 286.

\15. See, e.g., *Myst.* 3.5, on the different kinds of divine
possession, esp. 111.11-16. See also *Myst.* 2.3, where the various
kinds of apparitions (*phasmata*) of gods, demons, angels, archangels,
sublunar archons, material archons, and purified souls are discussed. If
the apparitions differ, so too would the divination.

\16. For the Forms, see Iamblichus, In *Tim.* Frr. 7, 29, and 34 and In
*Parm.* Fr. 6A. For logoi, see In *Tim.* Frr. 9 and 10, and Dillon's
notes *ad loc*.

\17. Cited by Festugiere, op. cit. (note 4) 185 note 2.

\18. to hola; i.e. the whole souls of the visible gods, as
differentiated from "partial" human souls. Cf. Proclus, In *Tim.*
3.276.19-22 and Finamore *op. cit* (note 9) 150.

\19. Iamblichus writes simply "gods," but it is clear that he means the
intellectual ones because they provide " intellections" (*noeseis*,
107.8) while the higher (*kreittones*, 107.12) gods of the fourth type
of dream provide noeta (107.15). The intellectual gods are intermediary
between the visible and intelligible gods. See Finamore *op. cit.* (note
9) 134-140. Sodano *op. cit.* (note 4) 287-288, who sees a three-part
division of dreams, thinks that the gods referred to here are the same
as those in the second type of dream. Sodano, however, fails to see the
complete hierarchy of dreams from 105.15 to 108.3 and is wrongly trying
to fit Iamblichus' schema to Posidonius' (*ap. Cicero, Div.* 1.64).

\20. The Iamblichean universe is a complex place. The reasoning
principles are the active side of the Demiurge and the Forms at work
within the cosmos. The Forms and Demiurge are intellectual entities and
are, in one sense, the cause of the logoi. There is, however, more to
the story. In Phil. Fr. 4, Iamblichus locates what he calls "the monads
of the Forms" in the first moment of the intelligible triad, being
(*on*). Now, the monads of the Forms are the Forms pre-existing in a
unitary stage before they are distinguished into several Forms (*to
hekastou adiakriton*). They are the causes of the Forms (*ousias aitios
eidetikes*). They could also, therefore, be termed causes of the
*logoi*. Thus, the soul in the fifth type of *theopemptos* dream may
ascend to the summit of the intelligible realm. For more on the
interconnection of realms and the soul's ascent to the One, see Finamore
*op. cit.* (note 9) 140-151.

\21. The human soul does not, of course, become divine. It retains its
own rank, but through the help of the gods, associates with them. See
Iamblichus, *de An.*
