---
author: admin
date: '2003-07-13 22:22:00'
layout: post
slug: movie-going
status: publish
title: Movie Going
wordpress_id: '1633'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I'm turning into a movie curmudgeon. R and I went to see **28 Days
Later** on Friday in Redmond. During the movie, a literal fistfight
nearly broke out (with shoving and such) after the girl behind us
wouldn't shut up and kept texting people on her cellphone. (I wasn't
involved in this beyond telling her to shut up.) She and her boyfriend
eventually left and the movie was much better after that... I highly
recommend the movie, by the way. I enjoyed it quite a bit. As one of my
co-workers said, it isn't really a zombie movie as much as a movie about
putting people in the worst possible situations and seeing how they deal
(or not) with it. What would you do if you woke up one day and
civilization had fallen completely apart? Yesterday was Home Depot day.
I went and spent hundreds of dollars (from savings) on a new electric
lawn mower. We had no lawn mower and the old owners of this casa hadn't
bothered to mow for a few weeks beforehand so it had gotten to the point
where once the cats hit the yard, we couldn't find them anymore. We also
bought a medicine cabinet to put in the master bedroom's bathroom (which
has no mirror since the old owners took it) and various nick-nacks.
Since I was in a money spending mood and my computer is getting a bit
creaky, I decided to bite the bullet and build a new machine as well. I
bought an "ICE-Cube" shuttle case (which is mostly made out of
pexiglass) with an 845 chipset motherboard in it, a P4 2.8 Ghz
processer, and 512 MB of RAM (the last was amazingly cheap). I pulled my
big ass hard drive out of the old box, the CD Burner and popped in a new
Radeon 9600 128 MB video card and then reinstalled Windows XP. The
system just smokes and I can actually keep it on top of my desk now. I'm
giving most of my old system to someone (after adding one or two
things), probably my daughter, and my old Geforce 4 TI video card to a
friend. I'm now pretty damn broke but oh well! Last night, R and I met
and had dinner with "gypsydragon" who is visiting from Texas. She may be
taking a position with the Borg up here in the next few weeks. She knows
a bunch of the Austin OTO crowd and is a longterm member of the order.
She'd never been to Seattle before so we wound up going to a fairly
decent restaurant and then hung out at her expensed hotel in the
jacuzzi. I'm hoping that she moves up here but this area may be a bit of
a shock for a Texan. Today, Madeline visited for a while and we're going
to watch **Gangs of New York** this evening. It also turns out that
Third Place Books is having a "40% off used books" sale so I picked up a
few things like some sci-fi, Cicero's political speeches and a book on
the early English colonies of North America. I feel like I haven't had a
lot of time to just quietly sit and read this weekend though. Next
weekend isn't going to be much better. Lama Wangdor is coming to town
and I'm going to go to Whidby Island for the early afternoon next
Saturday and Sunday for his Direct Mind Introduction teachings. I'm told
he's pretty incredible and he's the only lama I hear mentioned in the
same breath as Namkhai Norbu so I'm looking forward to it.
