---
author: admin
date: '2003-05-25 18:29:00'
layout: post
slug: bruce-sterling-in-2001
status: publish
title: Bruce Sterling in 2001
wordpress_id: '1393'
categories:
- Notable People
- Science Fiction
- Society
---

This is a speech that Bruce Sterling gave at the Metropolis Conference.
**Business UnUsual: Design and Deep Enviromentalism** *Author Bruce
Sterling speaks about his love and respect for designers & their role in
fomenting an environmental revolution. Talk delivered on Saturday May
19, 2001.* **Susan S. Szenasy, Metropolis Editor in chief:** You known
Bruce Sterling as a sci-fi writer, who makes the physical environment,
and the stuff in it, come to life. But you probably don't know that
Bruce considers himself a design-groupie. He says he finds designers
"adorable," in that he has not met one that he has not liked--though he
adds, with some dismay in his voice, that they do not seem to like one
another very much. A born storyteller, Bruce sees great stories to be
told about the design world, which he says has its own shamans and witch
doctors. Bruce believes in the power of design as well as the ability of
designers to help us think through the most challenging ideas of the
21st century in an overstressed and choking environment. Please meet the
father of Viridian Design, Bruce Sterling. **Bruce Sterling:** Yeah, hi,
that was all true. I am Bruce Sterling. I am a science fiction writer
and that is my day job. Yeah, I've been doing that for over 20 years
now. Under normal social conditions I'm perfectly happy to just sit
there, typing about Martians. But every once in a while a critical
situation arises when it is necessary to ramp up to a higher lever and
look for the bigger picture and that explains what I'm doing here
hanging out with you. I know we all haven't had our coffee yet, but
nevertheless I want to get right down to some big-picture futuristic
tacks here. So let me start off by telling you where we stand--what's
going on right now. Well, we spent the 1990s chasing the Internet
bubble, very typical American process. American Technological Sublime,
as the historians like to call it. We did this with railroads, we did it
with aviation, we did it with television, we did it with the space race,
and at the end of the day American society metabolizes the changes in
its technology and it just becomes a boring everyday part of normal
life. And that's what happened to the Internet, and that's fine and
dandy--except that real-life, normal, boring industries have a return of
about 7% on investment. So when you get all winded chasing this
Techno-Sublime, summer-of-love, California dream you're generally left
with this kinda Altamonte situation, saying stuff like, "Hey, where's
the electrical power? Hey wow, we kinda’ forgot to deal with the
physical reality here." So the Internet revolution was a profound one,
and it soaked up a lot of social and creative energy but it is just one
aspect of postindustrial society. And it is just the aspect that had the
freshest chrome on it. The World Wide Web still seems kinda’ clean and
detached from other parts of reality. But when your sitting there in
your Steelcase Leap chair at the computer with your ergonomic laser
mouse and trying to point, clip, and chip yourself a blobject-Garbo
wastebasket off Design Within Reach.com All of those things actually
involve big clunky flows of shape, materials, and energy, not just
immaterial bits on the Internet. There's still a lot shipping, trucks
and some smoke stacks and the assembly line and a chief financial
officer and some blue collar labor and some routers and injection
molders and numerically controlled machine tools and industrial
chemistry for all that epoxy and urethane and Techno-gel. And it's just
that we've got this kind of brainy-glasses Web-designer digital front
end on it now. So it looks a lot prettier. Now this is a condition like
the early days of the horseless carriage, when they used to ship them
with this mock-up of a wooden horse on the front so it wouldn't panic
the horses in the street--kind of the streamlined pencil-sharpener stage
where we go and put this really cool looking mono-conch shell over our
pencil sharpener now. But inside it is the same old 20th century
grinding mechanical guts. This explains why natural gas companies can
suddenly show up in Silicon Valley with their big rusty pipelines
instead of fiber optics. And they just haul these Internet start-up guys
right out of their Volvos and just hold them upside down, and just black
out both their eyes and just kick them, and kick them repeatedly, until
the platinum Visa cards just fall right out of their eel skin wallets.
And then these big energy companies just vacuum up all that loose cash
and they go back to North Carolina and Texas and the White House. The
Web is like a thin veneer over 20th-century industrialism. It's one
phosphor-dot thick. It's a thin crispy layer like landlord paint.
However this situation calls for some social actors who are heavier duty
than Silicon Valley software characters. The contemporary situation,
post-bubble, needs somebody who has a Silicon Valley level of brio and
imagination, but also has a serious engagement with material reality.
The 20th century's standard methods of industrialism need a major league
re-design, not just the standard varnish on barbarism, but a truly deep
rethink. The 20th century's industrial infrastructure is not
sustainable. It's basically a bubble, just like the Internet-bubble.
Instead of being based on a finite amount of gullible investors, it's
based on finite amount of ice in our icecaps, and air in our atmosphere
bubble, and a finite amount of free room for highways and transmission
lines, and so on and so forth. So in my hometown, Austin, Texas, we have
a swarm of unemployed dotcommies at the moment. But in the past three
years we also had the hottest June we ever had, and then the hottest
July we ever had, and then the hottest August we ever had. Then last
Labor Day in Austin it was 112 degrees Fahrenheit in my front yard,
which is hot enough to melt transformer cans off of the utility lines,
and hot enough to brown-out the traffic signals--and that was in our
president's home town, Mr. No-Kyoto-Treaty. This is a bubble that is
manifesting itself in the realm of bad weather, rather than the realm of
NASDAQ evaluations, but from a big-picture historical perspective it is
the same kind of phenomenon. Now ladies and gentleman, since I am a
Science Fiction writer, I can recognize a major trend when I see one. In
fact, wearing the scary black robes of the prophet of doom, that is kind
of a default position in my line of work. But if I wanted to actually
see some effective upbeat consumer-friendly reform in our worn out and
hokey industrial system, I wouldn't go hiring any Science Fiction
writers. No, basically what we need at this juncture are some major
league culture heroes. Somebody with working x-ray specs who can see
right past the packing and the political hype and the finance hype and
get right down to the level of the hardware and rethink our society's
support system so that it's safer, cozier, and more ergonomic. We need
people of the Titanic caliber of Thomas Edison and Henry Ford and John
D. Rockefeller because those are the basically the three 20th century
guys who got us into this mess. So why should I bring this up to
harmless, well-meaning furniture designers? Well, I'm not claiming that
you guys are destined to save the world, but you are clearly much, much
better at it than us Science Fiction writers. No, it's just that
furniture is a good place to start if you want a truly fresh perspective
on industrialism. You don't want to start from the top by ideologically
reeducating the mass consumer to become some kind of rigid hairshirt
new-soviet-man green guy. You want to start out practically, with
ergonomics and the human body and its affordances, with our health, and
our ease, and our comfort and our safety--with our working environment
and our home environment and our lungs and our skin and our
bones--because that's what's at issue. For instance, what's the most
genuine interface between a computer and a computer user? Is it really
all that dancing Flash animation that Jakob Nielsen always complains
about? Or is it our wrist tendons that blow out from carpal-tunnel, and
our lumbar vertebrae that give out from bad office chairs? Did you ever
actually look at these masters of the digital universe, these heavy-duty
programmers building the Internet, these portly guys with the wrist
supports? Kind of pair shaped, with thick glasses and midlife heart
attacks? They didn't get that way by accident. They were made that way.
They got that way by chronic repeated industrial abuse. That is not a
digital problem. That is a furniture problem. It's all about an
industrial system that cruelly sacrifices our human flesh for the sake
of dysfunctional machinery. So why don't designers just charge right out
there and save the whole world right away? I'll just get Stumpf and
Chadwick, and Ayse Birsel, and, oh, Lord Norman Foster and maybe Frank
Gehry, and we'll break out the old Amanda Brown Suit and Henry Dreyfuss
ergonomics bible. We'll have ourselves a conference call and we'll just
save the world with design--sort of. We'll that's like saying that we'll
call up a bunch of top-flight Hollywood screenwriters and get them
together and they'll write the ultimate movie and they'll save the movie
business. And nobody will ever have to watch another movie again,
because now we have created the perfect one. There are two sets of
problems here. First, there aren't any perfect design solutions where
form could follow function, because the functions keep changing along
with the technologically changing society. And second, designers don't
call the shots in industrialism anymore than screenwriters do in the
movie business. Before the advent of Streamlining in the 1930s, there
was basically no such thing as industrial designers, there was just
these eccentric guys like Norman Bel Geddes and Henry Dreyfuss, who were
doing set design for Broadway stage shows. Then they went along to these
Robber Barron tycoons of the 1930s, who were grinding the working class
underfoot as the shadows of fascism lengthened in Europe. And they said,
"Hey Mr. Capitalist! You really want to sell some stuff in the middle of
a global depression? Why don't you make it shinier, and sleeker, and
easier to use?" These oppressive running-dog bosses from Westinghouse
and AT&T, they replied, "Why on earth should I pay some clown like you
anything when I can just have my own idiot nephew figure out how the
product should look?" and being Raymond Lowey or Norman B el Geddes you
replied, "It is because I am a glamorous, visionary genius!" Actually if
you were Henry Dreyfuss, you were even cooler than that. Because Henry
Dreyfuss, never boasted, he would just put on his brown suit and he
would go to the meeting of the Board of Directors and he would draw a
picture of his new product re-design on a table napkin--only
upside-down. Now it takes about a week to figure out how to do this
drawing upside down, but the psychological effect is just stunning.
Before he drew them the picture upside down, they said, "Who is this
Henry Dreyfuss? Some kind of Broadway designer is he? He sounds like
he's Jewish." But once he drew the product, on the napkin, upside down,
they waited until he left boardroom, then they told each other, "He's a
supreme visionary genius!" I'm not claiming that designers really are
supreme visionary geniuses. In fact even though designers have a rap for
being kind of flaky, and arty, and temperamental, and since I, myself am
a Science Fiction writer, I can see that designers are just crammed full
of stony common sense. I actually trust designers. I think that
designers are the salt of the earth. I have a better opinion of
designers than designers have of themselves. Like, let's just imagine,
that I myself am in some really terrible situation, like one of those
mythic scale horrible problems you would see in a Science Fiction novel.
Let' s say I just fell of the edge of a cliff, and I am hanging halfway
down the cliff by my fingernails, clutching this long root and below me
there are three hungry tigers just licking their chops for my flesh. And
then these two buzzards fly in and they're just pecking, pecking,
pecking away at my root. And I can't climb up and I can't climb down and
sweat is breaking out all over me and my doom is clearly at hand and I
am in desperate peril. And then, an industrial designer comes along.
Well, hope dawns ladies and gentleman, not because this guy is a saint
or a hero or a visionary genius or moral good Samaritan, or anything
like that--it's because designers just can't resist problems like that,
that's why. Those buzzards, those tigers, and that root with its modulus
of elasticity; he's just bound to get all interested. And since I love
designers so dearly and I want to see them get richer, more powerful,
and more famous. Well, how does one go about that? Well, traditionally
designers have a rather narrow window in the value chain of industrial
society. A designer thinks up a chair and draws a picture of a
chair--but he doesn't cut the wood, smelt the metal, design the assembly
line. He doesn't package it, ship it, or promote it; he doesn't junk it,
he doesn't recycle it. All those other realms of activity belong to
other older professions, such as capitalist, miners, wood companies,
labor unions, ad agencies, and governmental bureaus. So there are
enormous sunk costs and lock-in in this chain of production. This is not
a new problem for the design profession; this is pretty much the oldest
problem that the design profession has. It dates way back to William
Morris and the Arts and Crafts movement, where this William Morris
character, who made furniture--probably the greatest wallpaper designer
ever--tried his best to foment a, no-kidding, social transformation to a
better world by striking at the heart of the industrial process, which
is to say, the alienation of the worker from the products of his labor.
William Morris, this guy who made that furniture, he had this system
pretty well figured out. A gal who's making herself a tapestry on a hand
loom, sitting in her own little cottage parlor, making that tapestry,
thread by thread. Yeah, she's a lot more physically and emotionally
engaged with that product than some oppressed child laborer in the giant
cotton mill in Manchester who's churning out yard-goods industrial
carpeting for the general store and the export market. Now the reason
that William Morris wasn't bigger, richer, and more powerful than Henry
Ford was that assembly-line standard production beats the living
daylights out of making stuff with your hands. The only way to make
stuff by hand is to recruit people who are ideological lunatics, like
hippie leather-makers, and the Amish, and the Shakers. I am novelist who
writes with a computer, I'm not going to pay a thin dime for a goddamn
Shaker chair. My health has improved radically since I bought a Stumpf
and Chadwick Aeron chair with its mobile arm rests, resilient pellicle,
and recycled a luminum frame. Every Shaker on the goddamn planet could
not build me this thing. This product is beyond the ability of any human
hand to mimic ever. So what's wrong with this situation? Huh, why aren't
I just the happy little consumer about my Aeron chair? Why am I up here
demanding more, more, more! Well, I have three big problems with my
Aeron. First, I have to adjust it, because it wasn't built just for me.
Ideally, it shouldn't say "Herman Miller Aeron" on it--I resent that. It
should just say "Bruce Sterling" on it. What's with this Herman Miller
guy getting top-billing here? He didn't think it up. He's not the auteur
here. I don't care about Herman Miller's relationship to my chair. He
can't help me. If I want to consult with someone about my Aeron chair, I
want to talk to Stumpf and Chadwick. You can't pay me to talk Herman
Miller. On the contrary, Herman Miller pays to get access to me. That's
what the advertising industry is for. That's why the airways and the
urban landscape and even the Internet, fax machines, and cell phones are
saturated with hucksters demanding my attention and trying to shake me
down. Is this a civilization? If I am the customer, why can't I be king?
If this were really about what I want as a consumer, the ultimate source
of the revenue stream, the furniture industry would look entirely
different--it would look something like this: first, all my furniture
would be peripherals of a household system, it would surround me like a
digital gesamtkunstwerk. Then when I wanted a chair, that chair would be
manufactured for me, to my measurements, in a production run of one,
which I get to watch. Kinda’ like a hungry guy watching a Bennihana
chef. This would be transparent production--my chair as a kind of
entertainment destination, a delightful novelty display in which I am
absolutely assured that my chair does not harm my flesh or my
environment in any way. On the contrary, every single aspect of the
entire production stream has been designerized. I got designer
lumberjacks, a designer fabric factory, a designer fabricator plant,
designet shippers, designer trucks, and a designer highway system. I can
point and click onto this whole shebang at any moment, and when I see
something going on in the industrial system that I particularly like, I
just click on it and buy stock in it. Then when my new super-personal
chair arrives, they take away the old one, which is dematerialized as
smart garbage, and refolded, back into the production stream without
effluence or pollutants of any kind. And in fact, I'm probably not even
paying for that chair, with any kind of luck I'm paying for my
relationship with the designer. The whole system hinges on the
designer's charisma and leadership. In effect we finally brushed away
all the dead mechanical clutter of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries--we are paying directly for imagination and ingenuity. I've
gotten right to the source; the primal wellspring of technical
innovation and so has that designer. Instead of fighting his way through
the traditional thicket of numbskull capitalists, he's busily
agglutinating his own worshipful demographic of consumers. Instead of
lecturing off a podium, like me or William Morris, he can lecture me
right out of his forks, chairs, and teakettles. All I have to do is
click on the hotlink and, bingo, there I am at Taliesin West in the
Frank Lloyd Wright indoctrination compound. And I follow this supreme
visionary genius, as his fan, not just because he is this grand Broadway
showboat, as he obviously must be, but because he can demonstrate to me
a kind of truly profound insight that is required to manage a system of
this kind of sophistication and complexity. He really is a visionary
genius. Now I'm not saying that any of this is actually fated to happen.
I'm just saying that's what I want. And it could happen thanks to
computer-aided design and manufacturing and the advent of the Internet.
A window has opened up that could allow something like this to occur.
Now no one is going to waltz up to designers and give them this kind of
power--if designers want this level of command and control of the
infrastructure of society, they are going to have to seize it. Basically
designers would have to rise to true greatness by growing with the scope
of our challenge. They would have to break the old-fashion limits of the
design profession and at the time they were done doing that they
probably wouldn't be called designers. They'd be called something like
icons, or designer-tycoons, or maybe designer-moguls. But at some point
a transformation along this line is definitely called for, because our
industrial system is so old and creaky now that our political problems
are our technological problems. Our current president is trying to
define himself in office by redesigning our electrical net. While the
other guy, the guy who got more votes but isn't the president, he tried
to define himself by inventing the Internet. Any number of power players
could move into this twenty-first century space--it could be venture
capitalists, or politicians, or non-governmental organizations, or even
the military. If designers are going to get there, they are goin=g to
have to play from their own strength, which is their ingenuity and their
visionary charisma, their ability to define the times on a material
level, a unique combination of freeform thinking and physical
practicality. Now it has been a very long time since designers have been
this audacious, but it is not unheard of in the design profession. So,
instead of just walking out of here with my rants and exhortations
ringing in your ears, I would suggest a practical experimentation, just
try this out a little and see how it makes you feel. Like next time some
journalist is interviewing you about your colleagues, let's say Karim
Rashid and his blob exhibit. Instead of saying, "Oh, yeah. Karim, that
stackable plastic Oh chair. Yeah, he's really out there. He's not
hokey." You could kind of clear your throat, and lower your voice and
say, "I consider Karim Rashid the prophet of a new and better way of
life." And then you're on some panel at an IDSA gig, and someone says
"Blobjects" you might say, "Blobjects are the harbinger of a new and
radically flexible means of production." And then somebody asks you why
on earth they should ever pay ten bucks for a Oral-B radically ergonomic
toothbrush. You kinda’ draw up your scarlet cloak, in this gush of dry
ice, and you can declare, "Every tool is a handle at one end and raw
possibility at the other!" And that would probably work great. Why?
Because the Internet hype is all digested now and without vision the
people parish. That is why. There is a major hype-famine. Right now,
there is a lot of loose money around with a loss of direction. The stage
is empty. And the first crowd with a really compelling, totally
out-there pitch will get all the VC money they can eat. Now, I'm not
saying this accomplishment is simple or easy. If you drink your own bath
water it generally ends in tears. I'm merely saying something very
plonking, simple and obvious to everybody, which is, that it is entirely
possible to utterly destroy the twentieth century industrial paradigm
and establish a new set of standards for performance that radically
improves our society's accumulation of wealth and power. Simple,
necessary, got to get done. And most people are not up to this strenuous
activity, but some few people in any society generally are. And when I
look across the contemporary social landscape, I'm thinking, "Hey,
man--designers." It's those war stories that attract me really. It's
like Henry Dreyfuss used to say about Norman Bel Geddes. He said, "Bel
Geddes always had his desk facing a blank wall." Now Norman Bel Geddes
was a top-end Broadway set designer. He knew what a window treatment
looked like. Norman Bel Geddes could have made any of office he wanted.
So what's with the blank-wall? Because that's where Norman Bel Geddes
got his really big ideas--that's why. Now I consider that an act of raw
courage. That is the maximum; that is the Holy Grail. We need some more
of that stuff nowadays. Somewhere out there in today's designer-land,
there is some guy who can really do that. And I want to know all about
that guy. I want the world to shower that guy with riches, fame, and
power. I want to talk to that guy. I want him to meet all my friends. I
want the bright-eyed guy's products. I want him to get traction,
horsepower, juice of every kind, and major command and control. I want
to see him a super star. Thank you for your attention and have a great
time at the fair.
