---
author: admin
date: '2003-06-22 18:04:00'
layout: post
slug: five-days
status: publish
title: Five Days...
wordpress_id: '1616'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

In five days, I move into the first home that I have ever purchased...
I'm surprisingly unstressed about the whole process. I don't know why
and I wonder if it will hit me at some point but it doesn't seem to be
one of those things that pushes my emotional buttons. I've had a hard
time getting stressed about certain classes of life issues (like those
to do with money) since I got divorced five years ago and had a
bankruptcy. It just doesn't matter that much in the grand scheme of
things. Yesterday, I took Jason down to his reading and book signing
event at Elliott Bay. That seemed to be an easier solution than trying
to give him directions and it got me out of the house. Afterwards, he
and I got coffee and swung by a Buddhist shop so he could look for a
meditation cushion. In the evening, we went out to dinner with my
friend, Richard, and [Colin
Low](http://www.digital-brilliance.com/kab/), who I had never met in
person before. Colin and I have known each other via the Internet since
the beginning of the 90s in the old *alt.magick* days. There aren't that
many of us that were around then. He's a researcher for HP and is in
town for some kind of Grid Computing conference. We sat and drank beer
with Colin, another local friend of his, and Richard and then went and
got dinner. Many interesting conversations ensued... Today, we've had a
quiet day here at the house. We're going to go to the Gnostic Mass soon
and then to a quarterly OTO potluck meeting. R and I have had quite a
few interesting conversations with Jason while he's been here and it's
been quite stimulating.
