---
author: admin
date: '2003-05-07 13:58:00'
layout: post
slug: blogging
status: publish
title: Blogging
wordpress_id: '1367'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I didn't mean to not write for a week! Really! Let's see. R and I have
gotten serious about getting a house in the Seattle area. We spent
Saturday day looking at houses that we found listed online and getting a
sense of distances and things we didn't like about kinds of houses or
neighborhoods. I called 's mother, who is a semi-retired real estate
agent, on Monday and got a reference to a good agent that she
recommended for the north part of the city/county, since she works the
other end and is mostly retired anyway. I've called him and he's begun
looking for places for us. He recommended a good mortgage broker to me.
I then liquidated most of my original grant from 1997 (the only one
currently worth any money) to get 10% down on whatever we get. That's
kind of a big deal and makes us fairly commited to doing this. It's kind
of sad that three years ago, I would have gotten three times as much
cash for it but that's the way the world is... Other than that, work has
been hell. I think I said "Fuck" or variants of it to my boss about ten
or twelve times yesterday. Things like "Give me a fucking break!" or
"You've got to be fucking kidding if you think that's happening." Not a
good sign. (***Note:*** he speaks in the same vulgar tones so my
swearing isn't an issue.) We went to a wonderful Beltane event at Mark
and Nef's place on Saturday. They have a nice piece of property with a
house and a fire circle on it and have folks out every year. People hung
out and chatted. I got to fondle 's swollen belly without getting
slapped. We burned a wicker man at midnight. Fun stuff. Off to a meeting
now.
