---
author: admin
date: '2003-08-17 05:50:00'
layout: post
slug: last-couple-of-days
status: publish
title: Last Couple of Days...
wordpress_id: '1853'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

So, my work situation is getting better. There is a reorg happening at
any time soon. Normally, reorgs aren't a good thing as it can completely
upset the dynamic of work structures but, in this case, it will be good.
My boss has been filling in for his normal role as test manager for our
work on the Windows Shell but also as a virtual test manager for the
overall efforts that my team (and many others) are involved in. (Sorry
to not be specific here...) As soon as this reorg happens, the second
part will be his only job. He really has been doing the work of two
people and since it directly affects my work, it impacts me as well.
When he first told me about the potential for this reorg two weeks ago,
he wasn't sure if he was going to go to the new org but I clearly would
be. Since I've worked with him for two years, I'm kind of fond of him.
He can be a cranky bastard but, damn it, how many of **your** bosses
dicsuss Cthulhu or **Transmetropolitan** with you? I was afraid that I
was going to have to retrain a boss but he decided to go with the new
org. Of course, since **his** boss will be coming as well, that might
also be a factor... We have no timeline on when it will happen but the
rumor mill is already starting to hear about it so it will have to be
within the next couple of weeks. R and I are going to be starting a yoga
class together at the beginning of October it looks like. That sounds
like it is a long time from now until you realize that August is half
over and that I (or we) am out of town for three of the weekends (and a
week) in September... It wil be October before I know it. I'm looking
forward to the Namkhai Norbu retreat and to seeing my brothers and
sisters in Minneapolis soon. It's been a year since I was out there
last. Tomorrow is the BBQ. We've had a few people back out at the last
minute and one couple showed up this evening... Luckily, we were home
(cleaning) and I gave them the tour of the house since they won't be
able to come tomorrow. They brought nice gifts as well (which is **not**
a requirement by any means). I'll be 32 on Tuesday. Bleh. As part of
growing older, I went to the DMV on Friday morning to get my license
renewed before it expired. There's nothing like spending an hour with
the lowling masses of humanity to make you wonder about the Bodhisattva
Vow compared to the Manson Family Vow. I survive with only one strong
impulse to kill and got my new photo. I even remembered to shave before
this one! I'm also in a good mood because I managed to reconnect with an
old Asatru friend from years past who I had lost track of. I found him
on, of all places, a private list for Dzogchen practitioners and
interested parties. It turns out that he's quite active with some of the
same people that I'm connected loosely too. We've been exchanging a
bunch of e-mail and he's had a lot of useful advice. This is kind of a
cheese sandwich entry so I'll end it now. It's late anyway.
