--- 
layout: post
title: Corinth
published: true
meta: 
  ljID: "2228"
  _podPressPostSpecific: a:6:{s:15:"itunes:subtitle";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:14:"itunes:summary";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:15:"itunes:keywords";s:17:"##WordPressCats##";s:13:"itunes:author";s:10:"##Global##";s:15:"itunes:explicit";s:7:"Default";s:12:"itunes:block";s:7:"Default";}
  no_lj: "1"
tags: 
- Daily Life
- Travel Greece Corinth
type: post
status: publish
---
So we left Delphi this morning after visiting the Temple of Athena there below the main site. It was beautiful but relatively small. Very picturesque in the mountains though.

We drove south via Thebes to Eleusis though we didn&apos;t go to that site today. We then went across the canal to Corinth. We got into the town in late afternoon and went out to the Ancient Corinth site after a number of twists and turns (the roads here are a bit confusing and the drivers are all crazy). 

Ancient Corinth is a huge site. It&apos;s probably at least as large as Delphi though in a much weirder state. It&apos;s basically about ten acres or so of walled off ground next to the old Corinth village (seven klicks from the new city). The site is fairly dug up and you can just wander freely through it. No ropes and barriers like we&apos;ve seen at all other sites up to now. Much of the site is in somewhat shallow pits below the main ground level. The Temple of Apollo is up on the hill overlooking most of the site. 

It&apos;s really hard to tell what you are seeing much of the time but it was very interested to freely wander through the ruins of the old buildings and roads walking on the old marble and granite. There seems to be an old spring still flowing underneath of one section and it was cool to see the water flowing through what is effectively a cave now.

We visited the museum on the site as well and, as usual, picked up a book of the museum exhibits and the sites. We have one from each of the main sites we&apos;ve visited. The museum was mostly old statues (sans heads normally), a lot of pottery and some mosaics that had been preseved and moved. Those were quite beautiful, as was much of the statuary. 

The new town of Corinth is just nasty and ugly though. It&apos;s probably the least nice city that we&apos;ve been in so far. If Delphi is the navel of the world, this place is the armpit. I&apos;m quite glad we&apos;re leaving in the morning.

Tomorrow, we drive to Nafplio, which is the original capital of Greece and is quite pretty. We&apos;ll visit the Mycenae ruins, spend another night at Nafplio and then go to Epidaurus, the home of the Asclepius cult. After that, our last few days will be in Athens.
