---
author: admin
date: '2003-07-19 16:32:00'
layout: post
slug: artificial-languages
status: publish
title: Artificial Languages
wordpress_id: '1640'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

The topic of artificial languages came up recently in an LJ discussion.
Neal Stepheonson had a cipher on the website for his new book,
**Quicksilver**, in John Wilkin's artificial language from the 1600s. I
found an article online about it by Borges. **THE ANALYTICAL LANGUAGE OF
JOHN WILKINS** *By Jorge Luis Borges* Translated from the Spanish 'El
idioma analítico de John Wilkins' by Lilia Graciela Vázquez; edited by
Jan Frederik Solem with assistance from Bjørn Are Davidsen and Rolf
Andersen. A translation by Ruth L. C. Simms can be found in Jorge Luis
Borges, 'Other inquisitions 1937-1952' (University of Texas Press, 1993)
I have noticed that the 14th edition of Encyclopedia Britannica does not
include the article on John Wilkins. This omission can be considered
justified if we remember how trivial this article was (20 lines of
purely biographical data: Wilkins was born in 1614, Wilkins died in
1672, Wilkins was chaplain of Charles Louis, Elector Palatine; Wilkins
was principal of one of Oxford's colleges, Wilkins was the first
secretary of the Royal Society of London, etc.); it is an error if we
consider the speculative works of Wilkins. He was interested in several
different topics: theology, cryptography, music, the building of
transparent beehives, the orbit of an invisible planet, the possibility
of a trip to the moon, the possibility and principles of an universal
language. To this latter problem he dedicated the book 'An Essay Towards
a Real Character and a Philosophical Language' (600 pages in large
quarto, 1668). There are no copies of this book in our National Library,
I have consulted, to write the present article, 'The Life and Times of
John Wilkins' (1910), by P. A. Wright Henderson; the 'Wörterbuch der
Philosophie' (1935), by Fritz Mauthner; 'Delphos' (1935), by E. Sylvia
Pankhurst; 'Dangerous Thoughts' (1939), by Lancelot Hogben. All of us
have once experienced those neverending discussions in which a dame,
using lots of interjections and incoherences, swears to you that the
word 'luna' is more (or less) expressive than the word 'moon'. Apart
from the evident observation that the monosyllable 'moon' perhaps is a
more suitable representation of such a very simple object than the
bisyllable 'luna', there is nothing to add to such a discussion; apart
from the composed words and the derivations, all the languages in the
world (including the 'Volapük' of Johann Martin Schleyer and the
romantic 'Interlingua' of Peano) are equally inexpressive. There is not
one issue of the Grammar of the Royal Spanish Academy that does not
ponder "the enormous treasure of pitoresque, bright and expressive words
of the extremely rich Spanish language", but it is mere bragging,
without corroboration. In fact, this same Royal Academy edits every few
years a dictionary, defining Spanish words... In the universal language
which Wilkins invented in the seventeenth century, each word is defined
by itself. Descartes, in a letter dated November 1629, had already
noticed that, using the decimal number system, it may take only one day
to learn how to name all the numbers up to infinity and how to write
them in a new language, namely that of ciphers (1); he did also suggest
the creation of a language similar to this former system, a general
language, organizing and covering all human ideas. John Wilkins, around
1664, started to work on this task. He divided the universe in forty
categories or classes, these being further subdivided into differences,
which was then subdivided into species. He assigned to each class a
monosyllable of two letters; to each difference, a consonant; to each
species, a vowel. For example: de, which means an element; deb, the
first of the elements, fire; deba, a part of the element fire, a flame.
In a similar language invented by Letellier (1850) a means animal; ab,
mammal; abo, carnivore; aboj, feline; aboje, cat; abi, herbivore; abiv,
horse; etc. In the language of Bonifacio Sotos Ochando (1845) imaba
means building; imaca, harem; imafe, hospital; imafo, pesthouse; imari,
house; imaru, country house; imedo, coloumn; imede, pillar; imego,
floor; imela, ceiling; imogo, window; bire, bookbinder; birer,
bookbinding. (This last list belongs to a book printed in Buenos Aires
in 1886, the 'Curso de Lengua Universal', by Dr. Pedro Mata.) The words
of the analytical language created by John Wilkins are not mere
arbitrary symbols; each letter in them has a meaning, like those from
the Holy Writ had for the Cabbalists. Mauthner points out that children
would be able to learn this language without knowing it be artificial;
afterwards, at school, they would discover it being an universal code
and a secret encyclopaedia. Once we have defined Wilkins' procedure, it
is time to examine a problem which could be impossible or at least
difficult to postpone: the value of this four-level table which is the
base of the language. Let us consider the eighth category, the category
of stones. Wilkins divides them into common (silica, gravel, schist),
modics (marble, amber, coral), precious (pearl, opal), transparent
(amethyst, sapphire) and insolubles (chalk, arsenic). Almost as
surprising as the eighth, is the ninth category. This one reveals to us
that metals can be imperfect (cinnabar, mercury), artificial (bronze,
brass), recremental (filings, rust) and natural (gold, tin, copper).
Beauty belongs to the sixteenth category; it is a living brood fish, an
oblong one. These ambiguities, redundancies and deficiencies remind us
of those which doctor Franz Kuhn attributes to a certain Chinese
encyclopaedia entitled 'Celestial Empire of benevolent Knowledge'. In
its remote pages it is written that the animals are divided into: (a)
belonging to the emperor, (b) embalmed, (c) tame, (d) sucking pigs, (e)
sirens, (f) fabulous, (g) stray dogs, (h) included in the present
classification, (i) frenzied, (j) innumerable, (k) drawn with a very
fine camelhair brush, (l) et cetera, (m) having just broken the water
pitcher, (n) that from a long way off look like flies. The Bibliographic
Institute of Brussels exerts chaos too: it has divided the universe into
1000 subdivisions, from which number 262 is the pope; number 282, the
Roman Catholic Church; 263, the Day of the Lord; 268 Sunday schools;
298, mormonism; and number 294, brahmanism, buddhism, shintoism and
taoism. It doesn't reject heterogene subdivisions as, for example, 179:
"Cruelty towards animals. Animals protection. Duel and suicide seen
through moral values. Various vices and disadvantages. Advantages and
various qualities." I have registered the arbitrarities of Wilkins, of
the unknown (or false) Chinese encyclopaedia writer and of the
Bibliographic Institute of Brussels; it is clear that there is no
classification of the Universe not being arbitrary and full of
conjectures. The reason for this is very simple: we do not know what
thing the universe is. "The world - David Hume writes - is perhaps the
rudimentary sketch of a childish god, who left it half done, ashamed by
his deficient work; it is created by a subordinate god, at whom the
superior gods laugh; it is the confused production of a decrepit and
retiring divinity, who has already died" ('Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion', V. 1779). We are allowed to go further; we can suspect that
there is no universe in the organic, unifying sense, that this ambitious
term has. If there is a universe, it's aim is not conjectured yet; we
have not yet conjectured the words, the definitions, the etymologies,
the synonyms, from the secret dictionary of God. The impossibility of
penetrating the divine pattern of the universe cannot stop us from
planning human patterns, even though we are concious they are not
definitive. The analytic language of Wilkins is not the least admirable
of such patterns. The classes and species that compose it are
contradictory and vague; the nimbleness of letters in the words meaning
subdivisions and divisions is, no doubt, gifted. The word salmon does
not tell us anything; zana, the corresponding word, defines (for the man
knowing the forty categories and the species of these categories) a
scaled river fish, with ruddy meat. (Theoretically, it is not impossible
to think of a language where the name of each thing says all the details
of its destiny, past and future). Leaving hopes and utopias apart,
probably the most lucid ever written about language are the following
words by Chesterton: "He knows that there are in the soul tints more
bewildering, more numberless, and more nameless than the colours of an
autumn forest... Yet he seriously believes that these things can every
one of them, in all their tones and semitones, in all their blends and
unions, be accurately represented by an arbitrary system of grunts and
squeals. He believes that an ordinary civilized stockbroker can really
produce out of this own inside noises which denote all the mysteries of
memory and all the agonies of desire" (G. F. Watts, page 88, 1904). ---
(1) Theoretically, the number of numbering systems is unlimited. The
most complete (used by the divinities and the angels) has an infinite
number of symbols, one for each individual number; the simplest needs
only two. Zero is written as 0, one 1, two 10, three 11, four 100, five
101, six 110, seven 111, eight 1000... This is an invention by Leibniz,
who was stimulated (it seems) by the enigmatic hexagrammes of I Ching.
