---
author: admin
date: '2003-09-20 19:06:00'
layout: post
slug: saturday-2
status: publish
title: Saturday
wordpress_id: '1893'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Here it is Saturday and I'm in the office at work. This sucks. ;-) We've
got a big push on a partner team to ship a patch so my team and others
got pulled in to help test. Since my team is in, I'm in. I did arrange
for us to get lunch. For someone who works at Microsoft, I don't
actually get required to come in on weekends a lot. This is good because
I am very jealous of my weekend time away from work. The fact that I am
salaried and don't get overtime (or anything actually) for coming in on
the weekend makes it all the more so. I'm going to go to a soccer game
of Madeline's in a while and then R and I are seeing Bubbahotep tonight.
Woot!! We watched **Equilibrium**, a really bad science fiction action
movie last night. It was B-list actor heaven though the cast wasn't bad
per se. It played about as well as most of the movies that the Sci-Fi
Channel makes for Saturday nights. In the future, after WWIII, the
survivors decide all emotional passion is bad and invent a drug (and a
fascist society to go with it) that everyone takes to suppress emotions.
The main character is an elite "cleric" who has the fun job of hunting
down people who don't get with the program and their hidden art until he
winds up off of his drug... This movie actually made an attempt to
explain how an elite supersoldier could kill hordes of people with his
guns and dodge bullets, the "Gun Kata," which is an uberefficient gun
fighting method but it was still cheezy. We're still looking at Santa
Cruz for next Saturday...
