--- 
wordpress_id: 1840
layout: post
title: Notocon Overview
date: 2003-08-11 17:19:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/2003/08/11/notocon-overview/
---
So R and I drove down to Notocon after leaving work in the mid-afternoon on Friday. We arrived, checked into the hotel and I managed to snag our badges right when registration for the con was closing, which is good since there was a dinner that evening. Apparantly, there was a note about my mother looking for me that was left as a joke but which people didn't read in the hurry to register me... ;-)Right after we got in, there was an opening BBQ outside for the event. R and I found my mother, her "husband," and various friends and greeted people. After we got food, I found out that the people at our table were from the lovely Knights Templar Oasis (KTO) in Boston. A number of these are people that I read quite often on LJ. I recognized <lj user="astarte93"> by her hair, of course. The BBQ was a lot of fun and the food was great.</lj> After the BBQ, there was a Livejournal Party at the Administrator's House, a separate building that the Portland crew had rented to stay in. I met many many LJ people there: abrasax, alleged, royalbananafish, 00goddess, yoginibare, and, of course, the Portlanders that I already knew. I'm missing a bunch that I met but... That party didn't go too terribly late for us and we wandered off to bed after midnight. The next day was full of presentations. Ones of special note were, of course, my mother's presentation on Nuit and the infamous speach on intiation and survival by Lon Duquette. In the evening, we had a nice formal dinner with a number of speeches and some entertainment. The food was wonderful. After dinner, people hung out at the venue until the staff kicked us out. A party then commenced at the Administrator's House again with a huge group. Over the course of the night, much alcohol was drunk (until we ran out) and people seemed to have a good time. I think I drank more than I have in at least five years (I'm a light drinker normally) I staggered off to bed at about 4:00 AM and crashed. Of course, I got the wonderful drunken sleep and wound up sleeping through the first presentations because of feeling tired and ill. Eventually, I got up but I had a winner hangover and spent most of the day hanging out with friends and acquaintances instead of being terribly active. Notocon was a wonderful chance to get to meet a lot of OTO people that I had not previously met in the flesh. LJ was pretty well represented there it seems. I'm looking forward to the next one, wherever it is.