---
author: admin
date: '2003-12-18 13:06:00'
layout: post
slug: too-weird
status: publish
title: Too Weird
wordpress_id: '2081'
categories:
- Notable People
---

[http://www.beliefnet.com/story/137/story\_13747\_1.html](http://www.beliefnet.com/story/137/story_13747_1.html)
**Jacko Joins Nation of Islam** Dec. 18--The King of Pop is restyling
himself Jacko X. Michael Jackson last night became a member of the
Nation of Islam--and sources told The Post his religious changeover
comes along with a shake-up of his personal staff. High-ranking members
of the Nation of Islam have been working to bring Jackson into Rev.
Louis Farrakhan's flock - and Jackson's conversion is now well-known in
the NOI community. Exactly why Jackson converted wasn't clear to The
Post's sources. But Fox News's Web site reported yesterday that
Jackson's brother Jermaine, who converted to Islam in 1989, has been
seeking to win favor with his more famous sibling, and has brought
Farrakhan's chief of staff, Leonard F. Muhammad, into Jacko's inner
circle as a "bodyguard." That's just one of many changes under way in
Jackson's inner circle, sources said. Word of Jackson's religious
conversion comes as prosecutors prepared to formally file charges
against him in a California child-molestation case - and as authorities
agreed to return Jackson's passport to him so he can travel to Great
Britain this weekend. Jackson isn't expected to return until Jan. 6,
lawyers said in court papers. Lawyers also agreed to put off Jackson's
arraignment for five days, until Jan. 16. Jackson remains free on $3
million bail after he surrendered to authorities and was arrested on
Nov. 20. Two days earlier, cops tore through Neverland, his
amusement-park-style estate just outside Los Olivos, Calif., looking for
evidence to back up molestation claims made by a 14-year-old boy.
Although there's talk that some in Jackson's camp want to replace
defense lawyer Mark Geragos, the high-priced Hollywood attorney appeared
in firm control yesterday, and met privately in the afternoon with Santa
Barbara County District Attorney Thomas Sneddon. Sneddon said he plans
to file the charges personally this afternoon at the courthouse in Santa
Maria, Calif. The King of Pop has vigorously denied the molestation
claims. L.A. County social workers in February cleared Jackson of
allegations he molested that boy. But former Santa Barbara County
Sheriff Jim Thomas has said he believes the alleged Santa Barbara County
molestation took place after the L.A. County probe
