--- 
layout: post
title: Time
published: true
meta: 
  no_lj: "1"
  _podPressPostSpecific: s:269:"a:6:{s:15:\"itunes:subtitle\";s:15:\"##PostExcerpt##\";s:14:\"itunes:summary\";s:15:\"##PostExcerpt##\";s:15:\"itunes:keywords\";s:17:\"##WordPressCats##\";s:13:\"itunes:author\";s:10:\"##Global##\";s:15:\"itunes:explicit\";s:2:\"No\";s:12:\"itunes:block\";s:2:\"No\";}";
tags: 
- Daily Life
type: post
status: publish
---
I find myself making less entries these days. It is an issue with time.

In any case, R and I went to the Open Circle Theatre on Thursday and saw their three short Lovecraft plays. We quite enjoyed ourselves and I especially liked the Radio play they did. We ran into Shade while we were there and had a chance to chat as well.

Friday, the Evil Empire went to see <strong>The Matrix: Revolutions</strong>. My group (as part of the Windows Client Division) went and saw it at the IMAX, which is the largest screen in town. Just visually, on that screen with their sound system, it was a really cool experience. We got to spend a few hours as a group in a large bar nearby beforehand so the group was lubricated enough to be pretty rowdy, which seemed fitting for a bunch of geeks. As to the movie itself: going against the seeming grain, I enjoyed it. I'm not going to discuss details since R hasn't seen it yet. No, they didn't solve all of the possible issues in the way that I was dreaming but I think that they did a decent job at it and I enjoyed the film. Remember, in the end, it is just a movie. heh.

Saturday, two friends of ours (a couple) came over in the evening for a night of visiting, board games, and the like. I spent part of the afternoon cleaning and finally bought a few things I'd been needing. I have my "Captain Kirk Chair," as R calls it, at the computer now so I won't give myself carpal at home from how I sit. I got my computer (a little shuttle case) off of the floor and generally cleaned up the area a bit.

Today, I had coffee with Gaaneden for a while in Redmond. We discussed mostly work, of all things, since she is a recent transplant to MS from California when her original company was acquired. I'm sure we'll speak more later, hopefully even about non-work stuff. It was good to finally meet.

I picked up the second volume of the newly reissued <strong>Dark Tower</strong> books by Stephen King while out. I had picked up the revised edition of the <strong>Gunslinger</strong> about two weeks ago and knew that I would want the second book on hand when I finished reading it. I read the first two when I was in college ten years ago but had never gotten any further. I don't usually read King's work these days but I'm making an exception for these.

I also picked up <strong>Finding Nemo</strong> on DVD and watched it with R and Madeline, my daughter, this evening. I really like that little movie and Madeline seems to love it.

This seems to make me current. This week I'm attending the first of three classes on "tantra" (Western sex magic and karezza really) with R. I keep thinking that there is something special next weekend but I can only think of the fact that Bishop Stephen Hoeller will be in town from California. Perhaps it will come to me.

I'm doing some studying on Hekate and Classical world magic right now but that is often the case.
