---
author: admin
date: '2003-06-26 03:47:00'
layout: post
slug: william-gibson-in-the-nyt
status: publish
title: William Gibson in the NYT
wordpress_id: '1623'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

[http://nytimes.com/2003/06/25/opinion/25GIBS.html](http://nytimes.com/2003/06/25/opinion/25GIBS.html)
**The Road to Oceania** *By WILLIAM GIBSON* VANCOUVER, British Columbia
Walking along Henrietta Street recently, by London's Covent Garden,
looking for a restaurant, I found myself thinking of George Orwell.
Victor Gollancz Ltd., publisher of Orwell's early work, had its offices
there in 1984, when the company published my first novel, a novel of an
imagined future. At the time, I felt I had lived most of my life under
the looming shadow of that mythic year — Orwell having found his title
by inverting the final digits of the year of his book's completion. It
seemed very strange to actually be alive in 1984. In retrospect, I think
it has seemed stranger even than living in the 21st century. I had a
valuable secret in 1984, though, one I owed in large part to Orwell, who
would have turned 100 today: I knew that the novel I had written wasn't
really about the future, just as "1984" hadn't been about the future,
but about 1948. I had relatively little anxiety about eventually finding
myself in a society of the sort Orwell imagined. I had other fish to
fry, in terms of history and anxiety, and indeed I still do. Today, on
Henrietta Street, one sees the rectangular housings of closed-circuit
television cameras, angled watchfully down from shop fronts. Orwell
might have seen these as something out of Jeremy Bentham, the
utilitarian philosopher, penal theorist and spiritual father of the
panoptic project of surveillance. But for me they posed stranger
possibilities, the street itself seeming to have evolved sensory
apparatus in the service of some metaproject beyond any imagining of the
closed-circuit system's designers. Orwell knew the power of the press,
our first mass medium, and at the BBC he'd witnessed the first
electronic medium (radio) as it was brought to bear on wartime public
opinion. He died before broadcast television had fully come into its
own, but had he lived I doubt that anything about it would have much
surprised him. The media of "1984" are broadcast technology imagined in
the service of a totalitarian state, and no different from the media of
Saddam Hussein's Iraq or of North Korea today — technologically backward
societies in which information is still mostly broadcast. Indeed, today,
reliance on broadcasting is the very definition of a technologically
backward society. Elsewhere, driven by the acceleration of computing
power and connectivity and the simultaneous development of surveillance
systems and tracking technologies, we are approaching a theoretical
state of absolute informational transparency, one in which "Orwellian"
scrutiny is no longer a strictly hierarchical, top-down activity, but to
some extent a democratized one. As individuals steadily lose degrees of
privacy, so, too, do corporations and states. Loss of traditional
privacies may seem in the short term to be driven by issues of national
security, but this may prove in time to have been intrinsic to the
nature of ubiquitous information. Certain goals of the American
government's Total (now Terrorist) Information Awareness initiative may
eventually be realized simply by the evolution of the global information
system — but not necessarily or exclusively for the benefit of the
United States or any other government. This outcome may be an inevitable
result of the migration to cyberspace of everything that we do with
information. Had Orwell known that computers were coming (out of
Bletchley Park, oddly, a dilapidated English country house, home to the
pioneering efforts of Alan Turing and other wartime code-breakers) he
might have imagined a Ministry of Truth empowered by punch cards and
vacuum tubes to better wring the last vestiges of freedom from the
population of Oceania. But I doubt his story would have been very
different. (Would East Germany's Stasi have been saved if its agents had
been able to mouse away on PC's into the 90's? The system still would
have been crushed. It just wouldn't have been under the weight of paper
surveillance files.) Orwell's projections come from the era of
information broadcasting, and are not applicable to our own. Had Orwell
been able to equip Big Brother with all the tools of artificial
intelligence, he would still have been writing from an older paradigm,
and the result could never have described our situation today, nor
suggested where we might be heading. That our own biggish brothers, in
the name of national security, draw from ever wider and increasingly
transparent fields of data may disturb us, but this is something that
corporations, nongovernmental organizations and individuals do as well,
with greater and greater frequency. The collection and management of
information, at every level, is exponentially empowered by the global
nature of the system itself, a system unfettered by national boundaries
or, increasingly, government control. It is becoming unprecedentedly
difficult for anyone, anyone at all, to keep a secret. In the age of the
leak and the blog, of evidence extraction and link discovery, truths
will either out or be outed, later if not sooner. This is something I
would bring to the attention of every diplomat, politician and corporate
leader: the future, eventually, will find you out. The future, wielding
unimaginable tools of transparency, will have its way with you. In the
end, you will be seen to have done that which you did. I say "truths,"
however, and not "truth," as the other side of information's new
ubiquity can look not so much transparent as outright crazy. Regardless
of the number and power of the tools used to extract patterns from
information, any sense of meaning depends on context, with
interpretation coming along in support of one agenda or another. A world
of informational transparency will necessarily be one of deliriously
multiple viewpoints, shot through with misinformation, disinformation,
conspiracy theories and a quotidian degree of madness. We may be able to
see what's going on more quickly, but that doesn't mean we'll agree
about it any more readily. Orwell did the job he set out to do, did it
forcefully and brilliantly, in the painstaking creation of our
best-known dystopia. I've seen it said that because he chose to go
there, as rigorously and fearlessly as he did, we don't have to. I like
to think there's some truth in that. But the ground of history has a way
of shifting the most basic of assumptions from beneath the most
scrupulously imagined situations. Dystopias are no more real than
utopias. None of us ever really inhabits either — except, in the case of
dystopias, in the relative and ordinarily tragic sense of life in some
extremely unfortunate place. This is not to say that Orwell failed in
any way, but rather that he succeeded. "1984" remains one of the
quickest and most succinct routes to the core realities of 1948. If you
wish to know an era, study its most lucid nightmares. In the mirrors of
our darkest fears, much will be revealed. But don't mistake those
mirrors for road maps to the future, or even to the present. We've
missed the train to Oceania, and live today with stranger problems.
