--- 
wordpress_id: 1631
layout: post
title: Ouch!
date: 2003-07-09 16:44:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=1631
---
From <a href="http://www.news.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/main.jhtml?xml=/opinion/2003/07/06/dl0602.xml&sSheet=/opinion/2003/07/06/ixoplead.html">the Telegraph</a>: <b>Tongue-fried</b> (Filed: 06/07/2003) The experience of Miss Becky Nyang, who almost died last week when a lightning-bolt struck her metal tongue-stud, should act as a salutary lesson to us all. Miss Nyang, an airport worker from Reading, was unfortunate enough to be caught up in an electrical storm while holidaying in Corfu. Her tongue-stud acted as a conductor, briefly subjecting her to an estimated temperature of 15,000ºC, and rendering her mute for three days. Tongue-studs have become de rigueur among fashionable young people: even Zara Phillips, the Princess Royal&apos;s daughter, has been photographed sporting one. Yet such is the current craze for piercings that a mere tongue-stud no longer has the power to raise many eyebrows. Indeed, many of the customers flocking to body-piercing parlours - a service now offered even in Selfridges department store - have been requesting more outre piercings in areas not commonly revealed in polite society. Once, concerned parents sought to deter their rebellious offspring with the warning of infections resulting from piercings. Now they can brandish the prospect of a lightning-bolt. And, with the proliferation of pierced sites on the body, the potential for agony only increases: one strike in the wrong place could prove a more electrifying experience than even poor Miss Nyang endured.