---
author: admin
date: '2003-06-01 00:45:00'
layout: post
slug: house-stuff
status: publish
title: House Stuff
wordpress_id: '1402'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

So, we had the house inspected by **my** inspector this Thursday.
Nothing too terribly extreme was found. There is dry rot in one section
of siding (fairly limited) on a corner of the house caused by a
incorrectly hung drainspout. Also, two out of the three front pillars
need to be replaced (which are 20+ feet long lengths of 8" X 8" wood)
because of water damage and a couple of other things. I'm told that this
isn't too unusual in buying a house or given our damp local climate. R
and I met with our agent this morning at Third Place books and went over
the inspector's report. We prepared the documents to request the seller
fix these problems and a couple of other minor things. The estimation,
including labor, is that they'll cost about $2,500 but we offered $1,000
over her asking price (because we knew another offer was on the table)
so we're thinking that she'll probably fix them. We'll find out in the
next few days. We're still on track to move in within a month unless
there is a fight about this stuff. The Papyri Magic list seems to have
taken off pretty well, better than a number of ths lists I've run over
the years. No one has ripped anyone a new asshole yet either. I added
some more stuff to my site at
[http://www.hermetic.com/pgm/](http://www.hermetic.com/pgm/) as well.
This and its connection to Neoplatonism is probably the main form of
magic that I study and work with on occasion that isn't connected to any
of my social or order involvements unless you want to count the Tibetan
Buddhist stuff. On that front, I'm going to be in New York City from
August 29 through 31 **OR** I'm going to be in Conway, MA from September
9 through 15. It isn't clear yet. The default is going to NYC though as
I have a friend who has volunteered crash space for me and it's the
cheapest place to fly. This is for Namkhai Norbu's Dzogchen teachings or
for a particular retreat with him, respectively. I'm also going to be
attending a Dzogchen direct introduction and teaching from Lama Wangdor
here in Seattle in July, which I've volunteered to help organize if they
need more bodies. I'm also likely to be going to Minneapolis to visit
with my Ordo Astrum Sophiae brethren the weekend of September 6 so I'll
either go to NYC for a long weekend, come home and go to Minneapolis the
next weekend or I'll be going to Minneapolis, staying in that area for a
couple of extra days and then going straight to Conway for the retreat.
I need to buy my tickets soon but I haven't finalized everything.
