--- 
wordpress_id: 1298
layout: post
title: The Transhumanist Geek Dream
date: 2003-03-07 05:24:00
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=1298
---
No, this isn't a continuation of the back and forth in my previous post. This is actually about my geeking out. Tomorrow night (well, technically today), I'll be going over to 's place (all other household members are on LJ but I'm not going to list them) to play <strong>Transhuman Space</strong>, the GURPS Science Fiction game set in a mildly transhumanist setting. It looks like I'll be playing the character I've nicknamed "Ramses the Revenge Mummy." TS has uploaded consciousness from humans (destructive uploads). This includes uploads from dead people though the circumstances of your preservation can affect the quality of the resulting mind. The setting also has android or puppet human (undeveloped brains with computer implant) bodies for such "Ghost" consciousnesses to live in (along with normal robot bodies or disembodied virtual bodies). We're looking at playing a more criminal, nasty oriented game so my character is going to (probably) be some poor not-so-nice guy who got himself shot dead and then had his body spaced. The body was quickly recovered and the frozen brain uploaded. The body was then "rebuilt" with nano and cybertechnology but not in the sense of being fully revived to life (though this is a game possibility normally). Instead, it's a slightly alive but not really corpse laced through with implants (medical and otherwise) that make it somewhat alive. These implants also "fix" the damage from being shot full of holes and enhance the now somewhat lower performant body. In a sense, it's now a flesh android since damage will have to be medically repaired instead of healing. Into this, a computer is placed in the brain and the uploaded ghost that originally owned the body is placed. He's a damaged upload so his memory and sense of self isn't all that could be hoped for (thus making enough pathos and giant background holes to be playable as a character). He isn't entirely sure what happened to him, what he was doing or everything about his past. He does have one overriding desire: <strong>REVENGE!!!! Bwa ha ha!</strong> It's like an old Elizabethian tragedy crossed with a cyberpunk mummy movie. Hence the nickname, "Ramses the Revenge Mummy." - "He wants revenge, he just can't remember on whom!" Needless to say, I tried explaining this in under five minutes (maximum geek out tolerance) to R and she just kind of tolerantly smiled at me. She seems to do that whenever I mention role-playing games or the ideas I get excited about with them. *sigh*