---
author: admin
date: '2003-07-31 00:09:00'
layout: post
slug: notocon
status: publish
title: Notocon
wordpress_id: '1650'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Just over a week to [Notocon](http://www.notocon.org). Which of y'all am
I going to see there and how will I know that you are you? If you do go,
go see my mom! Event: **Nuit - The Limitless Goddess** To the ancient
Egyptians Nuit was more than just the starry sky, she was the very
fabric of space within whose body were the dimensions of life and
eternity. What is the relation of this Goddess to the modern day? Who is
she now? What is the Thelemic connection? This presentation examines the
rich and venerable identity of a Goddess well documented more than 5,000
years ago. First we will explore her role in Egyptian cosmology and
religion. A brief run-through of her iconography will equip the
individual to recognize and appreciate her in Egyptian art. Then we move
on to Cairo in 1904 e,v,, with Aleister Crowley’s experience of the Lady
of the Stele of Revealing. We will see what Nuit has to say for herself,
her instructions and her desires for us. A personal interpretation of
her theology reveals Nuit as the Initiator of a new paradigm for
present-day magick. Please join Sor. Ashera as we explore the symbols,
character and message of the Goddess of Liber AL. Soror Ashera lives and
practices magick in Salt Lake City Utah. With the O.T.O since 1995, she
is Secretary of Horus Oasis, an Ordained Deacon and half of a Mass Team.
For over 15 years Ashera has pursued her education as a Ritualist
studying world religions, cross-cultural mythology, theology,
performance skills and of late - Ancient Egyptian religion. She is well
known in Utah for her devotion to the Goddess and the neo-pagan
community, maintaining ties with diverse pagan and international
religious traditions. Over the years she has presented at panel
discussions, talk shows, University lectures, police departments,
schools, and pagan workshops and led many, many rituals. Aside from the
O.T.O., her scholarship and energy have been directed to the founding
and administration of S.L.C.’s only open (legal!) Wiccan Church, of
which she is HP. Her personal spiritual focus is eclectic and
devotional. She admits to being completely obsessed with Our Lady of the
Stars, collecting Nuit art, prayers, poetry, and arcane Egyptian
references.
