---
author: admin
date: '2004-04-04 12:59:00'
layout: post
slug: philosophy-and-buddhist-books
status: publish
title: Philosophy and Buddhist Books
wordpress_id: '81'
categories:
- Buddhism
---

I did a run to the bookstores yesterday while I was out running an
errand. At the University Bookstore, I picked up Pierre Hadot's **The
Inner Citadel**, which is Hadot's examination of Stoicism in Aurelius'
**Meditations**. He gives a look at the underlying basis of what Marus
Aurelius was writing about, puts Stoicism into a context and discusses
the role of religion in the Roman Empire. I'm a bit of a Neoplatonist
myself with a focus on Theurgy but Stoicism has a lot of value and I've
begun learning more about it over time, even with some of its more
esoteric diffiulties with platonism in general. Stoicism has a strong
moral basis and, in these post-Christian times, I think that it has a
lot of value to give to people, be they pagans like myself or not. There
should be a bedrock of principle informing one's actions even if you
can't always live up to it well. I also picked up Jacques LaCarriere's
**The Gnostics**, which is a popular press kind of book from City
Lights, a leftist publisher. I got this used and it is more of a
literary reconstruction of how the Gnostics might have lived moreso than
a scholarly breakdown of Gnostic thought (if such a thing existed as a
monolithic structure, which is unlikely). It is short and ought to be
fun to read. On the Tantric front, I picked up **The Tantric View of
Life** by Herbert Guenther and **Tibetan Yoga** by Garma C. C, Chang.
The last is really utterly mistitled. The bookstore had another book
with the exact same contents labled "rare" under a different title. It
is really a collection of two sets of essays. The first on **The
Teaching of Mahamudra** and the second being **The Epitome of an
Introduction to the Six Yogas of Naropa**. I purchased it (cheaply) for
the latter as it is a basic but practical overview of the Six Yogas of
Naropa with instructions and advice and this is a topic of some interest
to me. Chang's work is early in the Buddhist popularization of the last
40 years but still good nonetheless. The final find today, always at the
used book store, is a bunch of early training materials from Chogyam
Trungpa's **Shambhala** training. This, overall, was Trungpa's attempt
to produce a somewhat recontextualized and secular vision of the Dharma.
Some people consider it a bit lightweight (and it is in a sense) but
I've found aspects of it appealing. There are a couple of public books
about it (two by Trungpa) but it is most often taught in the form of a
training program, which I have never attended due to lack of time and,
in some ways, sufficient interest. The books I found are large booklets
of lectures from the late 70's and early 80's by him that are
specifically used as part of his training program. They specifically say
"A Sourebook for Level A of the Shambhala Training Graduate Program" (or
level B, C, and D) so it seems that I got a hold of some internal
materials that the organization uses as part of their training. Pretty
obscure stuff but interesting from a number of points of view. I
purchased: A Book: **Great Eastern Sun** B Book: **The Dignity of the
Warrior** C Book: **Windhorse** D Book: **The Golden Key** and
**Discovering Magic** and one uncategorized book titled **The Three
Yanas of the Dorje Kasung** (Dorje Kasung is one of Trungpa's names...)
They were about two or three books each and are cheaply produced but I
think I'll get some interesting reading in them.
