---
author: admin
date: '2004-04-18 12:03:00'
layout: post
slug: what-is-that-taste-in-my-mouth
status: publish
title: What is that taste in my mouth?
wordpress_id: '91'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Yesterday was a busy day. I got up early, just before 7:00 AM, to start
recording a broadcast by Namkhai Norbu, the Buddhist teacher whose work
I study. He is doing a retreat in Venezuela right now and they were
going to stream it over the net. Using Soundforge, I can record,
directly from my sound card, any audio which passes through my system.
This is convenient for saving real-time realaudio broadcasts such as
this to mp3... I was going to get up, start recording and go back to
sleep. It turns out that I got the day wrong and it was this morning (I
did record it too though realaudio's player was nice enough to hiccup
one hour and eight minutes in so I lost everything after that...).

I went back to bed and got up a bit later. My friend Monk is going to
the middle east in the next couple of weeks and today was his "sell all
my shit" day. I'd previously agreed to purchase some furniture from him
so I needed to either rent a truck and get over there or track one down.
I tracked down my friend the Wiccan High Priestess and convinced her to
help me for a couple of hours through minor bribery and pleading. She
and I hooked up at Home Depot (ooo, stuff!) and went over to Monk's. He
and I proceeded to load up his Futon couch, two large bookshelves, a
coffee table and some corner shelves into the back of her truck. Getting
all this over to my place brought the whole thing to a four hour
endeavor with some side trips.

After that, I hurriedly changed clothes because it was also the day of
Monk's going-away dinner. We all met up at 7:00 at La Cocina's on
Capitol Hill and proceeded to engorge ourselves on Mexican food. After
that, a smaller group of us went with Monk to the Vogue for 80's night.
I think we were there until a bit after Midnight before people all
started dropping away. Since I don't dance and I wasn't driving, I
proceeded to do my best to get liquored up on vodka and bullshit with
Ashley and Oniyeh. I won a round of "who has the most disgusting story"
and I apparently became amusing for certain parties. My gift for being
crude in an entertaining way or somesuch... I had a good time and got
drunk enough to be disoriented when I woke up at 7:00 AM this morning to
record my little broadcast.

Today is a coffee day though...

On book fronts, I received volumes four through six of **The
Invisibles** this week so I can finish reading that series fairly soon.
I'm quite enjoying it. I hear that the last collection for
**[Transmetropolitan](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/search-handle-url/index=stripbooks&field-keywords=transmetropolitan/104-0949809-2851131)**
will be out in the next month or so. I also received my hardcover of
**[The Confusion](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0060523867)**
by Neal Stephenson so I'm finally starting
**[Quicksilver](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0380977427/)**
today as I hadn't gotten around to it yet. Yesterday afternoon, I did
manage to finish **[Singularity
Sky](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0441010725)** by
Charles Stross, which I thought was a good read. His **[Atrocity
Archives](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1930846258)**
came out from the publisher this week, though Amazon doesn't have it
yet. I got an e-mail from his fanboy list telling us where we could
paypal money to get it immediately. That's his Lovecraftian-mathematics
and Nazis spy thriller book that was serialized in some small press
thing a while back along with a follow-up novella in one volume. It
should be a lot of fun.
