---
author: admin
date: '2004-12-22 23:22:22'
layout: post
slug: bye-bye-kitty
status: publish
title: Bye Bye, Kitty
wordpress_id: '336'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I'm taking Freya, my kitty with cancer, to die in the morning. She
pretty much quit eating over the last two days. I got some wet food and
she managed to eat some of that that today. The only water she drank was
a couple of mouthfuls when the tom was getting his. Up until these last
couple of days, she's been active and begging for food every day. Not a
peep out of here today or yesterday for food or water. She's started
hobbling a bit more and she's starting to just sit and stare into space.
She was in our main bathroom, just sitting upright by the toilet,
staring off into the corner, for about two hours today. This isn't
resting and sleeping but sitting up and just kind of looking dazed in a
random direction. She quit cleaning herself the day before yesterday.
She literally stinks and I gave her a kitty bath with kitty shampoo.
It's like the cat version of hippy funk (including anything she sits
on). When I bathed her, she started wheezing with her breathes and
toddered away after I fluff dried her. So, this is the week for her
downhill slide. Realistically, she probably has a few more days but
she's not going to do well through the weekend. The vet is closed
Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. She's only going to get more miserable if
she can't eat and won't drink. I don't want to make her wait to die
badly or painfully over the weekend if she continues the current trend.
So, I made an appointment for tomorrow morning. It's kind of made this
evening rather glum for R and me. She's around and wants attention but
seems confused, upset, and unhappy.
