---
author: admin
date: '2004-08-17 08:22:07'
layout: post
slug: birthdays
status: publish
title: Birthdays
wordpress_id: '203'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Through the use of a friendly steroid topical and anti-histamines, my
bee sting has gone from "atrocious" to only "somewhat annoying." Someone
remind me not to get stung for another 20+ years since I think my immune
system is getting tweaked out over it. Still, I shouldn't complain too
much. My ex-wife is allergic (having been stung over 100 times in a
sibling incident) and could be killed by a sting. We used to wonder if
Madeline, my daughter, was allergic too but she's been stung a few times
and has been any worse off than most children.

The wedding is getting closer. It's just over a month and a half away
and we're just getting the invitations out. That's likely to be my fault
as much as anything as R has been doing most of the work there (and I
really appreciate it!) but I've been not focusing on it. My main task
coming up is to get a draft of the ritual, itself, put together for R
and I to review and for her to do her own edits on. Merging Buddhist,
Thelemic, and Pagan sensibilities without arriving at a mishmash is a
difficult task. I was looking at some of William Blake's poetry the
other night for some possible verse (heh) but nothing showed up. I'm
open to suggestions from the peanut gallery.

My birthday is in two days. I'll be 33. I have fairly neutral feelings
on this. On the one hand, I'm getting older and I'm not a lot closer to
some of my personal goals. The last decade, while being a time of
learning, maturing and career building, has also been one big
distraction from where I'd thought I'd be. Getting divorced, living with
Lesa, starting an order, merging that body into the Aurum Solis and then
heading in that direction, meeting R and then moving in together to now
where we're getting married. Along the way, I've gone from an
intellectual interest in Tibetan Buddhism to some level of actual
practice. Life is always sloppy isn't it? :-)

On the other hand, I also figure that, if I take care of myself, my life
is less than a half over, possibly even just a third. I've got a lot of
time left to do various things but I have to start planting and
cultivating personal seeds. I have education goals that mesh with my
personal goals and they aren't going to happen on their own. Of course,
all of these things are ***work*** and it takes a lot of energy to work
on anything after coming home from my work at the office. It would be
far easier to do what so many do and watch some TV. The problem is, of
course, then you realize that a year or three has gone by and your life
is exactly the same as it was. Life is motion and it has to actually
***move*** in order for it to matter.

R and I have spoken about creating a "five year plan" about where we
want to be together in five years and working towards it. Some of that
is about educational or other career goals and some is about things like
buying retreat land or a place away from the city. There is also the
real possibility of Madeline moving much further away as her mother
graduates from college and takes a teaching position wherever one is
offered. I like the idea of creating such a plan but it's a little scary
too because if we do create one, then we have to try to stick to it,
which is harder than just kind of drifting along. The price of doing
something organized...

I'm looking forward to having people over this week for my birthday
though some frantic cleaning is going to involved in order to set the
house in order for 20+ potential guests.
