---
author: admin
date: '2004-09-26 02:15:27'
layout: post
slug: doings-of-the-day
status: publish
title: Doings of the Day
wordpress_id: '243'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

![Olivia and Al](http://www.zhangzhung.net/pics/Olivia-Al-bday.jpg)Today
was my day to visit the inmates at McNeil Island and to lead them on
their voyage of self-discovery in the joys of Wicca and the arms of the
Goddess. Actually, since certain troublemakers got the boot to other
facilities, the dynamic of the group has continued to be friendly and
easy going. I like the guys, for the most part. For a bunch of
criminals, they are a generally sane bunch and are very intent on
improving their lives. In many ways, they are truer believes that many
of the pagans that I know as the inmates are much better focused a lot
of the time.

We're also preparing for their annual feast (think Christmas
equivilant), which is done for Samhain. We're doing it on October 30
this year. I'll be going out for my normal visit a week before and then
I'll follow it up on the 30th with Samhain ritual work with them in the
morning. I'll hang out until the late afternoon, when family and guests
will arrive for the dinner feast. Monk might even be in town from Kuwait
and I know the guys would love to see him at the feast if not the week
before.

After I got back in the early afternoon, R and I went over to Rubylou's
place for Olivia's first birthday party. See picture to right of me
being distracted from taunting the little bug. She's a sweet kid and
obviously was having a good time. She really likes her new musical toys
as well!!

When R and I finally got home, I took a nap for a while (I'd been up
about 12 hours at that point). She went out after a while to meet
friends for her batchelorette party. I'd decided not to do a bachelor
party for myself (too many things during the day and a lack of desire,
really) but R convinced me to drop by the Vogue around 10:00 or so and
meet up with her and her friends. This I did after watching Snake
Blisken on TV for a while and many drinks were had by all. We got to
hang out with our friends who, amazingly, all turned into pumpkins
before us. We were the last to leave with many begging off with the
"explanation" that they were the mass team for the Gnostic Mass tomorrow
and couldn't be out late. Bah!

Tomorrow is house-cleaning day since we have a bajillion freakin' people
in our house at the end of the week. We're doing the rehearsal dinner at
the house Friday night and the wedding is Saturday. My mom and Bill
arrive on Thursday night and will be staying with us as well. My brother
and his new wife will be staying with my grandparents (y'all knew I had
a brother, right?). Along with this, I'll be picking
[Sam](http://www.hermetic.com/webster/) up at the airport on Friday and
taking care of him since he's doing our wedding and all. Everyone leaves
Sunday except for Mom and Bill, who leave Monday afternoon. Monday
morning, R and I will get up, drop the ferret off at the Vet for storage
(they do a kennel thing) and then taking the shuttle to the airport to
fly to Milan!

Busy times, indeed. I know that I should be excited about the wedding
and I am but I just have visions of hordes of fucking people in my
house. <sigh\>
