---
author: admin
date: '2004-07-20 23:22:59'
layout: post
slug: nirvana-and-me
status: publish
title: Nirvana and Me
wordpress_id: '185'
categories:
- Daily Life
---
<p>Pseudo-inspired by my friend <a href="http://www.scottstearns.com">Scott&#39;s</a> going through the entire body of the <b>The Cure</b>&#39;s work, I&#39;ve been listening to <b>Nirvana</b> this evening, from <b>Bleach</b> through to the <b>From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah</b> with stops at single releases in between.</p><p>Unlike him I am not, at least at this time, going to post my capsule reviews of each album. Listening to this stuff reminds me of when I visited the Experience Music Project (EMP) here in Seattle. They have a whole section dedicated to 80s and 90s Seattle music. I walked down the row listening to old <b>Mudhoney</b>, <b>Green River</b>, and other bands. It&#39;s very much a mixed blessing to listen to this work as it takes me back to my early college years in a bittersweet sort of way.</p><p>For those that read my blog that aren&#39;t old friends (Ple, you can turn away now...), I walked out of high school after my junior year. I&#39;d attended half of ninth grade at a junior high in Utah, the second half at Franklin High School down in Rainer Valley in Seattle. That was nothing if not a culture shift (luckily, I was born in Seattle so I&#39;d seen black people before). My sophomore and junior years were at Roosevelt High School in the U District. At that point, I realized that enough was enough and &quot;fuck this shit, I&#39;m outa here!&quot; I looked forward to my senior year and realized that I wasn&#39;t going to actually learn anything. I had the epiphany that I already knew more than high school was going to ever teach me and that all I had to look forward to senior year was the fucking prom, which as a arrogant geek, I wouldn&#39;t get a date to anyway... I had a friend who had left my school (after getting thrown out of his prep school the year before as well) and gone to community college and I decided to do the same.</p><p>Fast forward to the next year and I was 17, barely, and going to the local community college. This was the time of my first exposure to large amounts of alcohol, lots of music, lots of chicks and the school computer club (which eventually cinched my incipient geekhood) along with the occasional classes. I bought my first album, <b>Ride the Lightning</b>, and then also bought a bunch of the local music, which was early <b>Nirvana</b>, <b>Mudhoney</b>, <b>Mother Love Bone</b>, and the like. Until I got to college, I had basically ignored music beyond watching a huge amount of MTV and listening to what my friends had. I had no move towards any sort of self-defined taste until then. This is roughly the same period that I discovered Industrial music as well, which I still love, both old school, middle school and current...but the Seattle Sound is my first love.</p><p>Listening to any of it takes me back in a big way and reminds me of what I thought life was like when I was 18 through 20 or so. It was a very hopeful vision of the future, being young, and I still bought a lot of the lies that we are all taught when we were young. It was also pretty angsty. Comparing it to now, I wonder how much has really changed on some days...</p>
