---
author: admin
date: '2004-12-27 23:12:16'
layout: post
slug: contractors-and-satan
status: publish
title: Contractors and Satan
wordpress_id: '339'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

This is long, overly detailed and probably not worth reading unless you
care about houses or something.

Originally, I was supposed to have the roof guy come over tomorrow but
the hole in the roof has been driving me crazy and I can see some water
damage in the dry wall. Meanwhile, today and tomorrow are supposed to be
the dry days this week with today being completely sunny.

When I first tried to schedule last week, they had an afternoon slot
free today but the start time was fuzzy because theoretically, there is
a morning job starting at 8:00 AM first. I took the 8:00 AM Tuesday one
instead because Monday was my first day back at work and they couldn't
promise when the guy would show. I changed my mind with all of the
anxiety the leaking has been causing me. When I got up this morning, I
called the contract service and they said, "Well, that slot was taken
but someone just cancelled so we can give you the afternoon slot. The
handyman will call you around 11:00 AM to tell you when he'll be there."

In order to get some real work done, I telecommuted in the meantime. I'd
been gone last week and almost everyone was still out. I can do a VPN
and get onto our intranet through my card key and some security hoops. I
used the time to close old tasks, do the monthly purge of old work
e-mail, sent out some notices, schedule some reviews, and do bug triage.
Around 11:00, the fellow calls me and says, "well, I'm kind of tied up
here. It might be four or five hours until I can come..." **WTF?!?!**
The sun goes down around 4:30 and this guy isn't going to be be doing
roof work in the dark. I complained and said, roughly, "Dude, I'm here
waiting at my house instead of in my office because I need this done and
I had an appointment for today." Anyway, he said he'd do what he could
and if he couldn't finish, I'd get the original 8:00 AM slot tomorrow.

Well, 3:00 PM rolls around and I'm still working from home. Yee-haw. He
calls and gets over here about 3:30, which doesn't make me happy. He's a
nice guy though and I try not to give the man, personally, grief. When I
called his office to confirm that I could still have the appointment
tomorrow (because I'm like that and I don't trust people), the woman
there gave me the unsolicited tale about how his morning appointment had
about three times the work that she had said that she did and they'd
been caught in the middle.

So, around 3:30, he finally gets the guided tour. "Look, water damage.
Climb up this ladder, look there, place where water comes in roof. etc.
etc." He gets up on my roof and finds the source of the problem, which
is damaged flashing on the sewage vent on the roof. The damage is from
when it was put in and then, on top of that, they didn't quite fit the
composite roof material over it. So, my roof is about eight or nine
years old, at a guess, and this has been slowly damaging this one spot
over this whole time until it finally got through the plywood and
started dripping inside my attic. Nice. Thanks a lot, fuckheads who
installed it wrong in the first place.

We debate what he can do and I rule out the cheap and dirty fix which
may not be perfect. He's coming back in the morning with a new cover for
the pipe to replace the entire damaged unit, new composite roof tiles to
re-roof around it, and maybe some plywood if he needs to replace the
damaged substrate. He says that I should wait until I have the roof
redone for that if possible because then we go from a little bitty whole
to making a foot or two wide one that he then has to seal up again...

While he's here, I have him look at the water damage. Dry wall is his
specialty, as it turns out, and I can see the damage (warping) from the
wet. It's mostly dry now. He looks at it and says "well, this is
probably pretty weak now and should be replaced." He then pokes at it
again ***and his hand goes through it into my attic.*** "Yep, that's
pretty brittle." Thanks, Dude. I'll just put some duct tape over the
half-fist sized hole in my bathroom ceiling.

He's going to put new drywall in, mud it, etc. but he probably won't
have time tomorrow so it will be another trip.

So, what's the sum total that the fixing of my roof in the one spot and
fixing the dry wall will cost me? He expects around **$1,000**. Jeeezus
F. Christ! Well, there goes the money that *would* go into savings for a
little while. Let's hope that my house doesn't suffer any other
collapses soon.
