---
author: admin
date: '2004-09-18 00:59:09'
layout: post
slug: life-and-books
status: publish
title: Life and Books
wordpress_id: '238'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I haven't written as much lately. Work has been a bit scattered over the
last week. It's easy to feel like you aren't accomplishing much when
there are so many random things to do. It's kind of funny because some
people are convinced that I'm the organized, process task-focused guy
but I get mired in shit often enough that I wonder. We suffer from too
many meetings but when you don't go, you find out about the important
bit that you just missed in the one your skipped. Ah well.

The wedding is two weeks from tomorrow. The first draft of the ritual
was given to Sam to go over. R went out to the Shumway Mansion and gave
them our menu. We'll be paying them tomorrow. We've taken care of the
photography and R arranged for the flowers. I should check on Sam's
reservation but we seem to be progressing. We ok'd the rings earlier in
the week so they are being cast as we speak. In a way, it will be a
relief to be finished and on our way to Italy for a couple of weeks away
from it all. I'm taking a total of three weeks off from work, which will
be nice. I'll have time to catch up on the jetlag once we return.

I still need to turn in the transcripts for my Master's program before I
go but that shouldn't be too difficult. Just one more task to be done.

I've gotten a few books from the library this week (rather than
purchasing them). I picked up **[Zen and the
Brain](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0262511096)** and
**[The Reckoning: The Murder of Christopher
Marlowe](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0226580245)**.
The latter interfaces with my current interest in fifteenth and
sixteenth century British history (though no pirates! Arr!). The former
is one of the first looks, and the first comprehensive, on the
neurological basis of meditative states. It's published by MIT Press and
is huge. The author is a neurologist and a zen practitioner and used his
skills and interest in one an investigation in what is going on in the
brain during meditative practice. I flipped through it a bit and it is
pretty impressive. I might actually have to buy it to keep for the
library.

Because of finishing a work task early and quickly (I assume), I
received a small gift certificate to Amazon. I quickly used it to pick
up Paul Di Filippo's recent novel, **[A Mouthful of Tongues: Her
Totipotent
Tropicanalia](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1587155079)**,
which is probably not the most work appropriate choice but, hey, I
wanted to read it! Soon, I will begin to climb Mt. Stephenson again
because the third volume of the Baroque cycle should be appearing soon.
