---
author: admin
date: '2004-05-15 01:52:00'
layout: post
slug: brief-history-of-dzogchen-alexander
status: publish
title: Brief History of Dzogchen Alexander
wordpress_id: '110'
categories:
- Buddhism
---

## Brief History of Dzogchen

### Alexander BerzinNovember 10-12, 2000

### Introduction

Dzogchen (rdzogs-chen), the great completeness, is a Mahayana system of
practice leading to enlightenment and involves a view of reality, way of
meditating, and way of behaving (lta-sgom-spyod gsum). It is found
earliest in the Nyingma and Bon (pre-Buddhist) traditions. Bon,
according to its own description, was founded in Tazig (sTag-gzig), an
Iranian cultural area of Central Asia, by Shenrab Miwo (gShen-rab mi-bo)
and was brought to Zhang-zhung (Western Tibet) in the eleventh century
BC There is no way to validate this scientifically. Buddha lived in the
sixth century BC in India.

### The Introduction of Pre-Nyingma Buddhism and Zhang-zhung Rites to
Central Tibet

Zhang-zhung was conquered by Yarlung (Central Tibet) in 645 AD. The
Yarlung Emperor Songtsen-gampo (Srong-btsan sgam-po) had wives not only
from the Chinese and Nepali royal families (both of whom brought a few
Buddhist texts and statues), but also from the royal family of
Zhang-zhung. The court adopted Zhang-zhung (Bon) burial rituals and
animal sacrifice, although Bon says that animal sacrifice was native to
Tibet, not a Bon custom. The Emperor built thirteen Buddhist temples
around Tibet and Bhutan, but did not found any monasteries.

This pre-Nyingma phase of Buddhism in Central Tibet did not have
dzogchen teachings. In fact, it is difficult to ascertain what level of
Buddhist teachings and practice were introduced. It was undoubtedly very
limited, as would have been the case with the Zhang-zhung rites.

### Guru Rinpoche and the Introduction of Nyingma Dzogchen

The next major figure, Emperor Tri Songdetsen (Khri-srong sde-btsan),
was cautious of the Chinese and paranoid of Zhang-zhung, most likely
because his pro-Chinese father had been assassinated by the xenophobic,
conservative Zhang-zhung political faction in the imperial court. In
761, he invited the Indian Buddhist abbot Shantarakshita to Tibet. There
was a smallpox epidemic. The Zhang-zhung faction in court blamed
Shantarakshita and deported him from the land. On the abbot's advice,
the Emperor then invited Guru Rinpoche (Padmasambhava) from Swat
(northwestern Pakistan), who drove out the demons who had caused the
smallpox. The Emperor then reinvited Shantarakshita.

Guru Rinpoche left in 774, without having completed the full
transmission of dzogchen. Seeing that the times were not ripe, he buried
some texts as buried treasure texts (gter-ma, "terma"). They were
exclusively texts on dzogchen.

### Samyay Monastery and the Bonpo Exile

Samyay Monastery (bSam-yas) (the first monastery in Tibet with the first
seven Tibetan monks) was completed shortly afterwards. Chinese from the
Chan (Jap. Zen) tradition, Indian, and Zhang-zhung translators worked
together there. Buddhism became the state religion in 779, probably
because Emperor Tri Songdetsen needed an alternative culture to
Zhang-zhung for unifying the country. The Emperor appointed three
families to support each monk.

Tibet conquered Dunhuang (Tunhuang, a Buddhist oasis on the Silk Route
northwest of Tibet) from China in 781. Yet, the Chinese emperor sent two
Chinese monks to Samyay every other year from 781, to maintain his
influence.

Shantarakshita died in 783, warning of trouble from the Chinese, and
advised inviting his disciple Kamalashila to debate them, which the
Tibetans did. The next year, in 784, a grand persecution and exile of
the Bonpos (followers of Bon) took place. Most went to Gilgit (northern
Pakistan) or Yunnan (southwestern China). According to the traditional
Bon account, Zhang-zhung Drenpa-namka (Dran-pa nam-mkha') buried the Bon
texts (all categories, not just dzogchen) at this time for safekeeping.
Historical and political analysis reveals that the reason for the exile
was suspicion that the xenophobic conservative Zhang-zhung political
faction might assassinate the Emperor for being pro-Indian, as they had
done to his father. Moreover, the state kept the Bon burial rituals and
sacrifices. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that it was a
persecution of the Zhang-zhung political faction, not a persecution of
the Bon religion. For this reason, several Western scholars assert that
the term Bonpo (followers of Bon) in this period had primarily a
political rather than religious reference. It was used for the
Zhang-zhung political faction at the court and their followers, rather
than for the spiritual leaders who performed the Zhang-zhung religious
rites at the court and their followers.

### Vairochana, Vimalamitra, and the Samyay Debate

Emperor Tri Songdetsen sent Vairochana, one of the seven original
Tibetan monks from Samyay, to India for more texts. He brought back both
dzogchen and Buddhist medicine tantras, and invited the Indian dzogchen
master Vimalamitra, who brought more texts.

The Samyay debate was in 792-794, between Indian and Chinese Buddhism.
The Indian side, led by Kamalashila, won; the Chinese, led by Hoshang
Mahayana (Chinese for "Mahayana monk"), were expelled from Tibet. The
Tibetans officially adopted Indian Buddhism and Indian Buddhist
medicine, although they kept some Chinese medicine influences combined
with it.

Shortly afterwards, the Tibetan Vairochana was exiled after Indian
abbots slandered him for revealing too much, so he buried more dzogchen
texts, as did the Indian Vimalamitra.

### The Three Divisions of Nyingma Treasure Texts

From the treasure texts buried by Vairochana and Vimalamitra and those
buried earlier by Guru Rinpoche, the dzogchen teachings were later
divided into three divisions.

1.  semdey (sems-sde, mind division), emphasizing pure awareness
    (rig-pa) as the basis for all (kun-shes, Skt alaya),
2.  longdey (klong-sde, open sphere division), emphasizing the open
    sphere aspect (klong) of pure awareness as the basis for all,
3.  menngag-dey (man-ngag sde, oral guideline division), also called
    nyingtig (snying-thig, heart essence division), emphasizing pure
    awareness being primally pure (ka-dag).

The first two derive from the treasure texts buried by the Tibetan monk
Vairochana and are not practiced much today. The mind division comes
from Indian texts that Vairochana translated; the open sphere division
from his oral teachings. The oral guideline division has two sections
from the two Indian teachers, one from Guru Rinpoche: Kadro Nyingtig
(mKha'-'gro snying-thig, Dakini Heart Essence Teachings) and one from
Vimalamitra: Vima Nyingtig (Bi-ma snying-thig, Vimalamitra's Heart
Essence Teachings).

### The Persecution of Buddhism

Emperor Ralpachen (Ral-pa-can) (a Buddhist fanatic), in 821, after
signing a peace treaty with China (complete with animal sacrifice) made
the Samyay abbot the head of the State Council. He decreed that each
monk in Tibet be supported by seven families. He also formed a council
to authorize terms to be included in a large Sanskrit-Tibetan compendium
of translation terms he commissioned, Mahavyutpatti (Bye-brag-tu
rtogs-pa chen-po, Grand [Compendium of] Derivations, Grand [Compendium
of Terms] for Understanding Specifics.) No tantra terms were included.
The Emperor and his council decided what was translated and allowed
practice of only the first two classes of tantra.

Most likely due to the excesses of Emperor Ralpachen, his successor
Emperor Langdarma (gLang-dar-ma) closed monasteries and persecuted monks
from 836-842. The Buddhist libraries and the ngagpa (sngags-pa, tantric)
lay tradition, however, were preserved. The first buried Bon treasure
texts were recovered by accident at Samyay in 913.

### The New Transmission Schools

Atisha was sent for from India in late tenth^^century, to clear up
misunderstandings of Buddhism, especially about tantra, concerning sex
and sacrifices. New translations were made from Sanskrit, starting with
the work of Rinchen-zangpo (Rin-chen bzang-po). During the early
eleventh century, the Kadam (later became Gelug), Sakya, and Kagyu
traditions developed as the Sarma (gSar-ma, New Transmission, New
Tantra) Schools. In contrast, Nyingma is the Old Transmission or Old
Tantra School. Bon also revived at this time, but now its contents are
very Buddhist. Bon texts were codified in 1017 - mostly non-dzogchen
texts in the main categories of the Buddhist literature. Later in the
eleventh^^century, Nyingma and more Bon dzogchen texts were found, often
by the same person.

### The Southern and Northern Treasure Text Lineages

In first half of fourteenth century, the Sakya master Buton (Bu-ston
Rin-chen grub) compiled the Zhalu Manuscript, which was the forerunner
of the Kangyur (bKa'-'gyur, the words of the Buddha). He did not include
any dzogchen materials in it, or any of the Old Translation Period
translations of the tantras.

Buton's contemporary, Longchenpa (Klong-chen Rab-'byams-pa Dri-med
'od-zer). put together Kadro and Vima Nyingtig into Zabmo Nyingtig
(Zab-mo snying-thig, The Profound Heart Essence Teachings), and
collected and organized the dzogchen texts available at his time. From
him derives the Nyingma Southern Treasure Text Lineage (lho-gter).

Bon codified its equivalent of the Kangyur in the second half of
fourteenth century, which includes dzogchen.

The Nyingma Northern Treasure Text Lineage (byang-gter) was started in
the late fourteenth century by Rigdzin Godem Jey (Rig-dzin rGod-ldem rJe
dNgos-grub rgyal-mtshan), a descendent of the early Tibetan kings. The
head of this lineage is called Rigdzin chenpo (rig-'dzin chen-po).

### Compilation of the Nyingma Canon and Major Texts

In the early fifteenth century, Ratna Lingpa (Ratna gling-pa) compiled
the Nyingma Gyubum (rNying-ma rgyud-'bum, Lakhs of Nyingma Tantras), the
collection of all dzogchen texts and all the Old Transmission
translations of tantras, expanding on Longchenpa's work.

Jigmey Lingpa ('Jigs-med gling-pa mKhyen-brtse 'od-zer), in the late
eighteenth century, revised Longchenpa's Zabmo Nyingtig and made it into
Longchen Nyingtig (Klong-chen snying-thig, Longchenpa's Heart Essence
Teachings), the main Nyingma dzogchen system practiced today. His
disciple, the First Dodrubchen (rDo-grub chen 'Jigs-med 'phrin-las
'od-zer), wrote a ritual text of preliminary practices for it, Longchen
ngondro (Klong-chen sngon-'gro).

### The Rimey Nonsectarian Movement

In the next generation, of the three main founders of the Rimey
(nonsectarian movement): Kongtrul (Kong-sprul Yon-tan rgya-mtso),
Jamyang-kyentsey-wangpo ('Jam-dbyangs mkhyen-brtse dbang-po), and Mipam
('Ju Mi-pham rgya-mtsho), the latter wrote the main Nyingma commentaries
to the major texts.

In the next generation of disciples, Peltrul (rDza dPal-sprul 'O-rgyan
'jigs-med dbang-po) wrote Guideline Instructions from My Totally
Excellent (Samantabhadra) Spiritual Mentor (Kun-bzang bla-ma'i
zhal-lung, Perfect Words of My Excellent Teacher, Kunzang Lamey
Zhellung). This is the most elaborate Nyingma text on the equivalent of
lam-rim (graded stages of the path) and on the preliminaries for the
Longchen Nyingtig.

Peltrul and Jamyang kyentsey-wangpo's disciple, the Third Dodrubchen
(rDo-grub-chen 'Jigs-pa'i bstan-pa'i nyi-ma), wrote the clearest
commentaries on dzogchen - Dzogchen Cycles (rDzogs-chen skor) and
Miscellaneous Writings on Dzogchen (rDzogs-chen thor-bu) - putting
dzogchen in the context of the other traditions of Tibetan Buddhism.
These are the commentaries that His Holiness the Fourteenth Dalai Lama
strongly relies on as a source for his explanations of a unified theory
of all four Tibetan traditions.

### Is Dzogchen Buddhist or Bon?

Is Bon Buddhist or non-Buddhist? Both lead to enlightenment, and use the
term Buddhahood. The seventh-century Indian master Dharmakirti said that
if a work accords with the main themes of Buddha, it is Buddha's
teaching. Thus, both Nyingma and Bon dzogchen are clearly Mahayana
Buddhist teachings because both have shared features with the Mahayana
sutras. Each, of course, also has its unique uncommon features.
Furthermore, whether we say dzogchen is a division of tantra or beyond
the divisions of sutra and tantra, Nyingma and Bon dzogchen also share
features in common with the various tantra classes.

Since Nyingma and Bon both claim the origin of dzogchen and that the
other copied it from them, there are three possibilities:

1.  Dzogchen developed very early in Buddhism and Bon received it
    through the early spread of Buddhism in Iran and Central Asia,
    through Zhang-zhung. Thus, Bon dzogchen had a Buddhist origin, but
    not directly an Indian Buddhist one.
2.  Bon learned of dzogchen from Guru Rinpoche at Samyay and buried it
    when the Zhangzhung Bon faction went into exile in 784, mostly to
    Gilgit (northern Pakistan).
3.  When the Zhangzhung Bonpos went into exile to Gilgit, they learned
    of it there, separate from Guru Rinpoche.

It is not possible to come to a decisive conclusion about which
possibility is correct.

### Dzogchen in the Kagyu Traditions

Dzogchen is also found in Drugpa Kagyu, coming from its late
twelfth-century founder, Tsangpa Gyaray (gTsang-pa rGya-ras). The Third
Karmapa (Kar-ma Rang-byung rdo-rje) introduced dzogchen into Karma Kagyu
in the early fourteenth century and wrote the Karma Nyingtig (Kar-ma
snying-thig, Karmapa's Heart Essence Teachings). He studied dzogchen
with Kumararaja, the same dzogchen teacher as Longchenpa had. Thus, Guru
Rinpoche is visualized in the Second Karmapa Karma Pakshi's heart in the
Karma Pakshi practice. There is also a Karma Kagyu practice of Guru
Rinpoche.

### Dzogchen and the Dalai Lamas

In the mid-seventeenth century, the Fifth Dalai Lama had pure visions of
dzogchen. He compiled them into Bearing the Seal of Secrecy (gSang-ba
rgya-can) and introduced these dzogchen practices to his Namgyal
Monastery, which otherwise mostly practices Gelug. Guru Rinpoche
prophesied that if the line from the early Tibetan kings - whose
descendants, the line of Rigdzin-chenpos, were the heads of the Northern
Treasure Text Lineage - discontinued, it would be detrimental to Tibet.
Thus, the Fifth Dalai Lama transmitted his dzogchen lineages also to the
Rigdzin-chenpo of his times. Consequently, the Northern Treasure Text
Lineage also practices the Fifth Dalai Lama's dzogchen teachings.

The next Rigdzin-chenpo transmitted the Fifth Dalai Lama's dzogchen
teachings to Nechung Monastery, the monastery of the state oracle,
Nechung (gNas-chung). The Nechung oracle was appointed at Samyay by Guru
Rinpoche to protect Tibet. There has been a personal connection between
the Dalai Lamas and the Nechung oracle since the time of the Second
Dalai Lama, when he moved from Tashilhunpo Monastery to Drepung
Monastery.

The Fifth Dalai Lama also appointed the throneholder of the Nyingma
Mindroling monastery (sMin-gling khri-can, "Minling Trichen") the head
of the Southern Treasure Text Lineage. Thus, the Fifth Dalai Lama
supported both major Nyingma lineages. There has been a close connection
between the line of Dalai Lamas and the Nyingma tradition ever since.
