---
author: admin
date: '2004-10-04 01:16:17'
layout: post
slug: the-wedding-ritual
status: publish
title: The Wedding Ritual
wordpress_id: '251'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

# Al & Rebecca's Wedding Ceremony

## Officiated by Sam Webster

## Opening

*The space is arranged with an altar at the far end from the entrance.
The priest enters, proceeds to the altar sunwise.* **Sam Webster** (*to
the guests*): "I wish to welcome all of you here who have come here
today. We have gathered in this place today to witness the beloved union
of Rebecca Erlin and Albert Billings in the sight of their families and
friends. They have invited you here to share this most special of
occasions with them and to bear witness as their two become one.
(pauses) We will now begin the wedding ritual with a purification and
consecration of this space." *Sam goes to the East taking the cup of
water.* **Sam** (*placing salt in cup*): “Let the salt of Earth admonish
the water to bear the virtue of the Great Sea. Mother, be thou adored.”
*He asperges the space in each quarter sunwise and then returns to the
North. He then takes up the incense.* **Sam** (*lighting incense*): “Let
the Fire and the Air make sweet the world! Father, be thou adored.” *He
then censes the space in each quarter, moving as he did with the cup.*
*Al enters the space and proceeds to the altar facing Sam. Al moves to
stand slightly off to the right side and turns to face the guests.*
*Rebecca enters the space, accompanied by Louetta and Leon Erlin. All
three proceed to the altar together.* **Sam**: "Welcome, Louetta and
Leon. Do you bring your daughter with love and joy on the occasion of
her wedding?" **Louetta & Leon Erlin**: (*answer as they may*) **Sam**:
"Please present your daughter to your son-to-be and, if you choose, give
your blessings to them." **Louetta & Leon**: (*answer as they may*)
*Louetta and Leon then proceed to their seats in the front. Rebecca and
Al turn to face Sam.* **Sam**: "Rebecca and Al, you are here today to
dedicate yourselves to each other in the union which is marriage. Is it
your will that you do so today?" **Rebecca**: (*answers*) **Al**:
(*answers*) **Sam**: "I will now purify and consecrate you by fire and
water so that you may begin this rite pure in body and spirit." **Sam**
(*asperging Rebecca*): "I purify you with Water." **Sam** (*asperging
Al*): "I purify you with Water." **Sam** (*censing Rebecca*): "I
consecrate you with Fire." **Sam**(*censing Al*): "I consecrate you with
Fire." **Sam**: "Purified and consecrated together, we will now invoke
those presences that give strength and wisdom to us all."

### Taking of Refuge

**Sam**: "I call to the company of those who have attained: to witness
and to aid! I take refuge in the already enlightened state That is in my
self and all other beings That is the provident, the very ground of
being. I take refuge in bornless, stainless awareness"
**Sam:**(*vibrating*)****"A...A...A" **Sam**: "Remember all ye that
existence is pure joy; that all the sorrows are but as shadows; they
pass & are done; but there is that which remains." **Sam**: "All is pure
and present, And has always been so. To this realization We commit
ourselves — Pure and Total presence."

### Vows

**Sam** (*to guests*): "Rebecca and Al are happy today not only because
they can share the joy of their love for each other with family and
friends, but also because they have the opportunity to express their
aspirations for the future. They will now share their promises with each
other." *Rebecca and Al turn to face each other in front of Sam.*
**Rebecca & Al:**"Today we promise to dedicate ourselves completely to
each other, with body, speech, and mind. In this life, in every
situation, in wealth or poverty, in health or sickness, in happiness or
difficulty, we will work to help each other perfectly. " **Sam** (*to
Rebecca & Al*): "Rebecca and Al, do you pledge to help each other to
develop your hearts and minds, cultivating compassion, generosity,
ethics, patience, enthusiasm, concentration and wisdom as you age and
undergo the various ups and downs of life and to transform them into the
path of love, compassion, joy and equanimity?" **R&A**: “We do” **Sam**:
"Recognizing that the external conditions in life will not always be
smooth and that your own minds and emotions will sometimes be mired in
circumstance, do you pledge to see all these events as a challenge to
help you grow, to open your hearts, to accept yourselves, and each
other; and to generate compassion for others who are suffering? Do you
pledge to avoid becoming narrow, closed or opinionated, and to help each
other to see various sides of situations?" **R&A**: “We do” **Sam**:
"Understanding that just as we are a mystery to ourselves, each other
person is also a mystery to us. Do you pledge to seek to understand
yourselves, each other, and all living beings, to examine your own minds
continually and to regard all the mysteries of life with curiosity and
joy?" **R&A**: “We do” **Sam**: "Do you pledge to preserve and enrich
your affection for each other, and to share it with all others? To take
the loving feelings you have for one another and your vision of each
other's potential and inner beauty as an example and rather than
spiraling inwards and becoming self absorbed, to radiate this love
outwards to all beings?" **R&A**: “We do” **Sam** (*to All*): "So
ancient is the desire of one another which is implanted in us, reuniting
our original nature, making one of two, and healing the state of
humanity. And when one of them meets with his other half, the actual
half of himself, whether he be a lover of youth or a lover of another
sort, the pair are lost in an amazement of love and friendship and
intimacy. For the intense yearning which each of them has towards the
other does not appear simply to be the desire of a lover, but of
something else which the soul of either evidently desires and cannot
tell, and of which she has only a dark and doubtful presentiment.
Although they are divided into opposites, for loves sake, in truth they
were never separate, but always joined heart--to--heart like these two
beings here before you. For love is that true bliss that seeks to return
us to this primordial union."

### Exchanging of Rings

**Sam** (*to Madeline Billings in audience*): "Madeline, please approach
with the rings." *Madeline comes forward, carrying the rings on a
cushion and presents them to Sam. She pauses to hug Al and then Rebecca
and returns to her seat.* *Sam hands the rings together to hold between
them and in front of him. He then purifies and consecrates the rings
with water and fire.* **Sam** (*gesturing to the rings*): "The wedding
ring is an outward and visible sign of union. These rings are an ancient
symbol of unity, blessed and simple. Round like the sun, like the eye,
like arms that embrace one another. Circles, for love that is given
comes back round again and again. Therefore, may these rings remind you
that your love, like the sun, illuminates; that your love, like the eye,
must see clearly; and that your love, like arms that embrace, is a grace
upon this world." **Sam**: "Please take the ring of your betrothed."
*Rebecca & Al do so.* **Sam** (*turning to Rebecca*): "Please repeat
after me: I give you this ring [pause]. Wear it with love and joy
[pause]. As this ring has no end, neither shall my love for you [pause].
I choose you to be my husband this day and every day." (*Rebecca places
ring on Al's finger*) **Sam** (*turning to Al*): "Repeat after me: I
give you this ring [pause]. Wear it with love and joy [pause]. As this
ring has no end, neither shall my love for you [pause]. I choose you to
be my wife this day and every day." (*Al places ring on Rebecca's
finger*)

### Pronouncement

**Sam Webster**: "Forasmuch as Rebecca and Al have grown in knowledge
and love of one another, and because they have agreed in their desire to
go forward in life together, seeking an even richer, deepening
relationship, and because they have pledged to meet sorrow and joy as
one family, I declare that by the power vested in me, I now pronounce
you husband and wife. You may kiss the bride!” *Rebecca & Al kiss. After
they finish, they turn to face the guests.* **Sam**: “Ladies and
Gentlemen, please join me in congratulating Mr. and Mrs. Billings.”
*When such congratulations as occur are finished, Sam continues.*

### Closing

**Sam**: "We will now close this ritual so that we might enjoy our time
together on this day." **Sam** (raising arms and proclaiming): "May the
benefit of this act and all acts, Be dedicated unto the Complete
Realization and Supreme Enlightenment Of all beings, everywhere,
pervading space and time, so mote it be!" "May the benefits of practice,
ours and others Come to fruition, ultimately and immediately And I
remain in the State of Presence. —**A**" **Sam**: "Telestai! It is
finished."
