---
author: admin
date: '2004-04-02 12:44:00'
layout: post
slug: abbot-and-costello-in-the-21st-century
status: publish
title: Abbot  and Costello in the 21st Century
wordpress_id: '79'
categories:
- Humor
---

ABBOT: Super Duper Computer Store... Can I help you? COSTELLO: Thanks.
I'm setting up an office in my den, and I'm thinking about buying a
computer. ABBOT: Mac? COSTELLO: No, the name's Lou ABBOT: Your computer?
COSTELLO: I don't own a computer. I want to buy one. ABBOT: Mac?
COSTELLO: I told you, my name's Lou ABBOT: What about Windows? COSTELLO:
Why? Will it get stuffy in here? ABBOT: Do you want a computer with
Windows? COSTELLO: I don't know. What will I see when I look in the
windows? ABBOT: Wallpaper. COSTELLO: Never mind the windows. I need a
computer and software. ABBOT: Software for Windows? COSTELLO: No. On the
computer! I need something I can use to write proposals, track expenses
and run my business. What have you got? ABBOT: Office. COSTELLO: Yeah,
for my office. Can you recommend anything? ABBOT: I just did. COSTELLO:
You just did what? ABBOT: Recommend something. COSTELLO: You recommended
something? ABBOT: Yes. COSTELLO: For my office? ABBOT: Yes COSTELLO: OK,
what did you recommend for my office? ABBOT: Office. COSTELLO: Yes, for
my office! ABBOT: I recommend office with windows. COSTELLO: I already
have an office and it has windows! OK, let's just say, I'm sitting at my
computer and I want to type a proposal. What do I need? ABBOT: word.
COSTELLO: what word? ABBOT: word in office. COSTELLO: the only word in
office is office. ABBOT: the word in office for windows. COSTELLO: which
word in office for windows? ABBOT: the word you get when you click the
blue w COSTELLO: I'm going to click your blue w if you don't start with
some straight answers. OK, forget that. Can I watch movies on the
Internet? ABBOT: yes, you want real one. COSTELLO: maybe a real one,
maybe a cartoon. What I watch is none of your business. Just tell me
what I need! ABBOT: real one. COSTELLO: if it's a long movie I also want
to see reel 2,3&4. Can I watch them? ABBOT: of course. COSTELLO: great,
with what? ABBOT: real one. COSTELLO: OK, I'm at my computer and I want
to watch a movie. What do I do? ABBOT: you click the blue 1 COSTELLO: I
click the blue one what? ABBOT: the blue 1. COSTELLO: is that different
from the blue w? ABBOT: the blue 1 is Real one and the blue w is word.
COSTELLO: what word? ABBOT: the word in office for windows. COSTELLO:
but there's three words in office for windows! ABBOT: no, just one. but
it's the most popular word in the world COSTELLO: it is? ABBOT: yes, but
to be fair, there aren't many other words left. It pretty much wiped out
all the other words out there. COSTELLO: and that word is real one?
ABBOT: real one has nothing to do with word. Real one isn't even part of
office. COSTELLO: stop! Don't start that again. What about financial
bookkeeping you have anything I can track my money with? ABBOT: money.
COSTELLO: that's right. What do you have? ABBOT: money. COSTELLO: I need
money to track my money? ABBOT: it comes bundled with your computer.
COSTELLO: what's bundled to my computer? ABBOT: money COSTELLO: money
comes with my computer? ABBOT: yes. No extra charge. COSTELLO: I get a
bundle of money with my computer? How much? ABBOT: one copy COSTELLO:
isn't it illegal to copy money? ABBOT: Microsoft gave us a license to
copy money. COSTELLO: they can give you a license to copy money? ABBOT:
why not, they own it.


