---
author: admin
date: '2004-09-29 00:19:17'
layout: post
slug: ticktockticktock
status: publish
title: Tick...tock...tick...tock
wordpress_id: '246'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Well, four days to go...It's midnight on Tuesday and I will be married
Saturday morning.

If anyone plans on kidnapping me, I think your window of opportunity to
put me on a pirate ship is closing. Take me while you can.

I'm still surprised by the number of people, including family, who
didn't RSVP. Yeah, I know, putting a pre-formatted reply with two blank
check boxes into a self-addressed stamped envelope is pretty fucking
hard, isn't it? <sigh\> At this point, I assume that people who didn't
RSVP just aren't bothering to show up. If they do, they sit in the back,
so there, and they better bring us something either cool or containing
alcohol.

We're still waiting to hear back from the jewelers with the rings. They
know the deadline is Thursday and they made special notes (I saw them)
about it so this isn't unexpected.

My non-tumerous cat has become worrisome in his weight loss over the
last two quarters so I'm going to take him into the vet this week to see
if he needs thyroid medicine, a different diet, or if he's just a gaunt,
old man. I'll be very happy if I come back from Italy without a mound in
the backyard and a missing cat. That reminds me that I should leave
access to money to my ex-wife, who is watching the cats, in case one of
them should expire so she can dispose of the remains. There's a happy
thought, eh? It isn't like she can call me in Florence and tell me the
sad tidings if something does happen.

I haven't gotten the other one x-rayed yet because I realize that if
they did it now and I then I waited a month for the surgery, that the
cancer might spread in that month. It's a shitting time to try to put
her in for surgery now so I'm going to have to wait until we come back.

I get the feeling that I'll have one cat and one ferret by this time
next year though. We'll see.

On a different note, I finished the fourth (and "last") of Gene Wolfe's
**Book of the New Sun** this evening. That leaves me the single volume,
**Urth of the New Sun**, followed by the four volume, **Book of the Long
Sun**, to read still. I can then close with the three volume, **Book of
the Short Sun**, as a finisher. Perhaps I should just go re-read the
**Dune** series.

As with R, I've been collecting a short but thick set of books to take
with us to Italy. Since we have to carry anything we have for 16 days,
the requirements are:

-   You have to be a paperback.
-   You should **really** be a mass-market paperback (this shorter and
    less wide).
-   You should be at least 400 pages long so I can love you for a while.
-   You should be cheap and used so when I am done with you, like an
    ex-from-hell, I can toss you aside and not feel bad about it.
    Otherwise, I have to carry you forever on my back (like the previous
    mentioned figure).

So far, I'm carrying C.S. Friedman's **In Conquest Born** and Stephen
Baxter's **Timeships**. Hardly the poster children of high brow fiction
but they'll do. I might add some Gene Wolfe in except he tends to write
thinner novels and the collected volumes of two tend to be trade
paperbacks. I was going to ascend Mt. Stephenson again but, alas, only
**Quicksilver** (which I have read) is in paperback and there is no
fucking way I'm carrying a 900+ page hardcover on my back for two weeks
in Italy.
