---
author: admin
date: '2004-07-18 17:08:40'
layout: post
slug: principia-discordia-and-dzogchen
status: publish
title: Principia Discordia and Dzogchen
wordpress_id: '181'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/sacred-chao.jpg)R and I went
and saw the [live
performance](http://www.annextheatre.org/principiaDiscordia/Principiadetails.htm)
of **Principia Discordia** at the Empty Space Theatre in Fremont on
Friday night. This was an hour long production of part of the opening
tale of how Discordianism came to be founded and its basic tenets from
the **Principia Discordia**, a "bible" of the religion of Discordian
"discovered" and published a few decades back. Old hat for most pagans
but apparently quite new to many squares still. I've found two versions
online [here](http://www.trip23.com/pd/index.htm) and
[here](http://www.ology.org/principia/) for those that haven't been
graced with a copy of this text in the past. I think I first read it
when I was 16 or so and hadn't paid much attention to it in a long time.
The performance itself was entertaining and had little bits done by the
actors as well as the required bits from the text itself. You had a nice
fellow in a bright yellow jumpsuit proclaiming himself Malaclypse the
Younger, as well as Omar Ravenhurst, a reference to Bob Dobbs or two and
a song number. It was a good time.
![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/Ah_60.jpg)Saturday, I
"attended" the beginning of Namkhai Norbu's Mandavara Retreat in
Venezuela online. The retreat is being conducted at the center on the
island of Magarita off of the coast but it is being broadcast over the
internet for members of the Dzogchen community that want to attend.
Because I am going out of town for the final four days, I can't actually
attend the whole thing but the morning teachings will be broadcast
online via streaming audio to members around the world from 7:00 to
10:00 AM my local time every day for the next two weeks. For those that
can't easily attend live or miss a teaching because of time scheduling,
mp3 files are made available to members daily for download. This is
fairly progressive and the first time that I've heard of Norbu (or any
other Buddhist teacher for that matter) trying to reach more than a
local group live using the net like this. I listened to the opening
teaching live and I downloaded today's, which I couldn't listen to
because my daughter was spending the night. I plan on tuning in when
possible over the next two weeks. Madeline came over last night and we
watched **Catch That Kid**together. The movie was ok but not terribly
special.**Spy Kids** is much better and in a similar vein. Today was a
day for a bit of cleanup. Madeline left in the early afternoon and we
have friends coming over for a little BBQ on the back deck this evening.
It gave me an excuse to pick up a bit and set things in order in the
public space of the house. R finished the re-painting of the bathroom
that I'd been working on the last two weekends as well so it would be
ready when people came over.
