---
author: admin
date: '2004-05-11 10:36:00'
layout: post
slug: a-day-off
status: publish
title: A Day Off
wordpress_id: '104'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I stayed home from work yesterday and took a "personal" day off, for
lack of a better term. As they say in Office Space, "I did nothing and
it was everything I dreamed it would be."

Actually, I watched the second half of **Crouching Tiger, Hidden
Dragon**, which I hadn't seen in years and started watching on Sunday (I
own it). After that, being in a Chow Yun Fat kind of mood, I watched
**The Replacement Killers** for grins. I haven't seen much with him the
last few years and that's too bad.

I was actually on work e-mail a bit as the demands of the job, blah blah
blah, and did an updated spreadsheet for my boss. I caught up on my
backlog of RSS feeds on my bloglines.com account and read a bit of
**Quicksilver** as well.

In an attempt to do something more useful later, I worked on a
non-fiction book as well when I went down into Kirkland to meet R after
work. The book in question is **One Taste**, which is a selection of Ken
Wilber's diaries from 1997. I'm a bit of a fan of his work even though I
often disagree with certain elements of it. I find it interesting and
often insightful, if a little ra-ra at times. **One Taste** has been
called arrogant and other mean names by people but it is Ken writing
about his day to day life, his ideas, and his spiritual practices. I
read 130 pages of it yesterday so it must have been interesting enough.

As a writer, he has an interesting schedule. He gets up at three or four
in the morning, meditates for an hour or two, starts working at his desk
at home around five or six AM and works until one or two in the
afternoon. He then lifts weights for an hour or does yoga and spends his
evenings either catching up on pop-culture going to movies or
socializing with people. He also has this round robin seminar thing with
Naropa where 20 or 30 students comes to his place with their instructor
once or twice a month in the afternoon and he spends a few hours doing
question and answer or talking to them.

I found the day to day life and spirituality aspects as interesting as
anything else. I admire the self-discipline of his morning meditation
and his self-directed work. He's a fairly prolific author but he does it
all on his own. Neal Stephenson made similar comments about how he sits
down to write, no matter what, every day. Much of Wilber's day,
depending on the time of the year, is actually reading and not writing.
Apparantly, he usually knocks out his books in two or three months at a
time, often with marathon writing stretches. Much of his desk time is
lightly reading between two and four books every day... A harsh life, I
would imagine.
