---
author: admin
date: '2004-08-29 23:15:04'
layout: post
slug: wicca-wicca-woo
status: publish
title: Wicca Wicca Woo
wordpress_id: '220'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

A little over a month to go until the wedding and R has pointed out how
much remains to be done. Most of the big things are figured out but
little things (like details on decoration and schedule) need to be done.
Frankly, I'll be glad when it is over. It's a lot of work and much of it
is really, in the end, for our families, not so much for us. This was my
weekend to go down to the prison again. On arriving, I find out that the
current leader of the group (possibly self-appointed by himself and
pals) got himself shipped out to another facility. His two main buddies
were shipped out at the same time. No notice, just packed on a bus and
gone. The funny part is that it happened two days before the last Sabbat
and he was running the ritual so the guys had to do a mad scramble to
get something figured out. Given the lack of communication (we
communicate by mail if at all), I didn't know until I had arrived this
weekend. Apparently, the prison system has a point system in place based
on behavior, among other things. Being as a medium to low security
facility like this seems to be a privilege, which means people tend to
come and go. People were pretty mum on why these three were shipped out
but I didn't see many tears either... Frankly, I'm glad they are gone.
This leader was the one guy in the whole group that had a definite
agenda that didn't seem to have much to do with why I was there or,
really, what most of the other guys wanted. Inmates don't argue or
disagree in front of volunteers like me so they always kept pretty mum
about any tensions but I'm not an idiot (normally). He was also the only
one of the group that made me feel even vaguely personally intimated on
a physical level. Now, some of these guys are pretty big and they are,
let's face it, criminals, but they have a good vibe for the most part
and really seem glad to talk to me about religion, magical work, and
spirituality in general. They're trying to straighten their shit out and
they don't generally play the B.S. power games beyond a constant level
of bitching about personal gripes with staff and such, which I expect.
For a bunch of convicts, they are fairly likeable and I like working
with them. Having these guys gone made me realize how much tension
they'd been adding to the whole group. I'm working them through
Buckland's big blue book since most of them were not terribly spiritual
on the outside and weren't pagans at all before. They have no background
in anything and don't even know how people generally do things. Running
through the book allows them to get a better basic understanding of
Wiccan practice and the book is laid out in a lesson format with test
questions at the end of the lessons. It makes things a lot easier and
gives us a little structure in our work. Switching gears to the Buddhist
front, I'm contemplating going to the local Chagdud group, **[Chagdud
Gonpa Amrita](http://www.cmc.net/~amrita/)**, and just hanging out on a
regular basis for a while. I don't get a lot of contact with Buddhist
practitioners day to day and it would be nice to have people to talk to
about basic issues. It is a Nyingma center and I consider myself a
Nyingma practitioner when pushed (or Rime' really most of the time) with
an emphasis on Dzogchen. The lama there is an American who is actually
known to at least two friends of mine and who I've only heard good
things about. The lack of a language barrier would be nice as well. The
funny thing is that I've been to at least three events at this place
over the last couple of years. It's where I received Red Tara, [Guru
Drakpo](http://www.thangka.ru/history/he_padmadsat_7.html) and P'howa on
previous years. In each of these occasions, though, it was a visiting
lama doing the teachings and empowerments so the lama of the center was
just kind of in the back somewhere... The one thing that I did
especially notice about this "center" (it's a house in Lake City in
Seattle) that was different from others was the people there...the first
time I went there, it was to see Lama Tsering Everest and receive Red
Tara from her. The crowd was a complete mix of people ranging from
20-somethings up to senior citizens. It's almost the only time I've seen
"my own" in the sense of seeing younger people with dyed hair,
piercings, and/or tattoos. There were hippie mamas with their babies as
well as the usual smattering of middle aged people. That time, when we
were packed in like sardines, I wound up having a long conversation with
a 60ish woman who had just taken vows and shaven her head. She'd gotten
into the Dharma through her son. She'd wanted to find out about whatever
it was that he'd found that had suddenly made him so much calmer and
happier. That had been a few years before. In most Dharma centers, the
members are disproportionately female and it's usually women between the
age of 40 and 65. At Pema Kilaya, I was one of roughly *four* guys out
of 20+ people and only two of us were under 45. It's like hanging out
with your parents. I don't have a problem hanging out with older people.
I got over that when I worked at a retirement community for a while but
it is nice to see your own peer group as well. In any case, Chagdud
Gonpa Amrita has a regular schedule where they do meditation on certain
days and then do a regular tsok feast during the month. I figured I
could easily be low-key and just start going to either or both of those
and see if things go anywhere. The gods know that stewing in all of this
stuff alone has its own strengths and weaknesses and I miss talking to
people in person about some of this. I want to avoid the bullshit
politics of a center though. On a related note, it appears that both
[http://www.angrybuddhist.com](http://www.angrybuddhist.com) and
[http://www.angrybuddhist.org](http://www.angrybuddhist.org) are taken
so I probably won't be using those domain names very soon, angst or not.
