---
author: admin
date: '2004-10-16 12:56:20'
layout: post
slug: the-vatican
status: publish
title: The Vatican
wordpress_id: '261'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

We arrived in Rome yesterday afternoon. We didn't leave Sorrento until
fairly late and had to navigate through the cesspool of Naples on the
way out. R found us a fairly good hotel not far from the train station
so we didn't have to go far after we got off the train. We'll be there
until Wednesday morning, when we leave to go back to the states. Today,
being Saturday (with many things closed on Sunday) was "see the Vatican"
day. We got up around 7:30 am and took the subway to near the Vatican
Museum. We then got in a line that was at least six blocks long, I shit
you not, to get into the museum. Luckily, the line moved at a near
constant walk and we got into the museum in less than 40 minutes. The
Vatican Museum is, itself, pretty incredible. You get to walk through
many very beautifully decorated rooms. One long gallery was nothing but
painted maps of Italy from at least 400 or 500 years ago along the
walls. These were the murals. The museum also has a fairly good
collection of Roman and Egyptian artifacts, which we went through and
where I took many pictures. They have the famous status of Lacoon, among
others, and I got a couple of wonderful shots of a well preserved statue
of Anubis bearing the attributes of Hermes (carrying a caduceus even).
Many wonderful things there. We took the time, and dealt with the herds,
to see the Sistine Chapel while we were there as well. R had missed
visiting this on her previous trip to Italy nine years ago. The chapel
was beautiful and it is hard to really do justice to the pictures that
are painted there. I did think, in many ways, that it was less
impressive than many of the other paintings and the overall ambience in
the Vatican but it was impressive none the less. After we got done at
the museum, we took a break for some lunch and then headed over to St.
Peter's. I really wanted to see the basilica there more than just about
anything else in the Vatican. We probably spent an hour and a half or
more inside. It is huge and the whole thing is an impressive display of
the wealth and artistry of the Roman Catholic church over the years. I
didn't realize how much sculpture there was inside of St. Peter's as
well. Many many status of popes and saints that are twenty feet tall or
so. While there, we visited the tombs of the popes as well and saw the
tomb of St. Peter (the first pope...) also. All in all, pretty
incredible. After we got done, we'd been out for six or seven hours so
we called it a day and went back to the hotel. We just finished a nice
dinner. The food here has been great. My only complaint is that the
Italians make it impossible to eat in less than an hour and a half or
two hours. By the time we finished and I asked for the check, I still
had to wait 25 minutes for it to show up. I hate to be an impatient
American but it does get old sometimes. Rome has been pretty neat so
far. Tomorrow, I'm not sure what we're visiting but I have some stuff
written down.
