---
author: admin
date: '2004-10-09 06:20:03'
layout: post
slug: florence-day-two-one
status: publish
title: Florence - Day Two (One?)
wordpress_id: '256'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Today, we got up early at our only somewhat dingy hotel (which is also a
converted palazzo but not that nice ayway). We choked down the nastiest
breakfast that I've had here and went out. For kicks, we climbed up into
the belltower next to the Duomo. It's quite famous but, let me tell you,
it's one fuck of a climb. R said something like 480+ steps or the like.
Let's just say, only the people at the top of the cupola in the Duomo
were higher than us. I literally had to stop and sit for five minutes
when I made it to the top (and R did too and she's been working out so
no cracks about how out of shape I am...). Luckily, the urge to puke
into the piazza of the Duomo in Florence from the top of the belltower
did flee. I can tell you that we aren't going up into the cupola now.
The view up there was great. You could see Florence in all directions
and I got some good shots (I hope) with my camera. We seem to be here on
some bigass anniversary for Florence (and I haven't been able to find
out details) so we saw a bit of a parade, marching band, Florentine
outfits, a cannon, etc. from the top. We've run into it several times
since then as well so a lot seems to be going on today. Following this,
we collapsed at a cafe after climbing down and drank about a liter of
bubbly water. We then carried our bags to our new hotel, Albergo Scoti,
which is by the river aka the Arno. Check in wasn't until about 2:00 pm,
so the resident had us leave our stuff and we wandered around Florence a
bit more. Eventually, we ended up at the famous bridge (the name is
escaping me) and took some time crossing it and looking around. Tucking
into a mom and pop ristorante, I had the best food that I've had the
whole time in Italy, some lasagne. After, R and I went back towards the
Duomo. We stopped at a shop on the way and found some nice images of
Florence and the Duomo that she wanted to get. I picked up a couple of
extremely nice leatherbound blank books, one for my BoS with my current
work, and something like 16 cards with an image of the Baptistry on it
for my Ogdoadic brothers and sisters in the Aurum Solis. Finally, we
went back to the Duomo but much of it was partitioned off because of
some event happening later. I wanted to try to get some shots of the
image of Ficino (I think) that I saw there. We did pick up some things
in the gift shop though. Finally, we went back to our hotel and saw our
beautiful room there. The main room of the hotel has frescoes covering
every wall and the ceiling. It's all old work. Our room is actually
spacious, with nice furniture (including tables, chairs, a wardrobe) and
a brand new, remodeled bathroom with shower. It's heaven. We decided to
stay for another night so we'll have the place for the next three nights
before going to either Naples or Assisi. R is taking a nap so I came
down to do a little Internet. I'm staring at the Arno, which is just
outside my window (I could jump into it from here) and the bridge is
about 100 feet away. Florence is such a beautiful old city.
