---
author: admin
date: '2004-01-10 13:05:00'
layout: post
slug: this-week
status: publish
title: This week...
wordpress_id: '13'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

I haven't posted much this week. It's been fairly busy at work but not
too bad. We're working on a big patch and we also have ongoing work with
the Service Pack 2 for Windows XP. Those that care about such things
probably heard about the Beta for that which MS released a few weeks
back. Along with a lot of addressing of root security vulnurabilities in
a lot of areas (RPC, IE, OE, etc) it includes some new features for IE
like Pop-Up Management, Management of Active-X controls, etc. The latter
work is all tested by my immediate direct reports. On the personal
front, I met with a British Traditional Wiccan High Priestess friend of
mine of many years over coffee and dinner. It looks like I'll be working
with her on her training of a small group of people new to Brit Trad
Craft. I had some training in this over 12 years ago and have been
speaking with her about doing more official training, getting initiated
into their lineage properly, etc. She's also interested in doing this in
an organized fashion that will allow us to have an organized curriculum
that I (and ) can use in our Prison Ministry work with the guys at
McNeil Island. I don't know how often the Wiccan group will meet but I
expect it to be a couple of times a month. I'm also turning in my
application for the local Masonic lodge that has OTO members actively
playing a role in it within the next few days. This brings my likely
regular ritual/groups commitments to:

-   **The Citadel of the Ouroboros** - My longest lasting commitment. We
    meet a few times a month and at other odd times to do regular ritual
    work on Ogdoadic lines and to continue to pursue the training
    relating to our initiation. This is my main ritual focus most of the
    time.
-   **Ordo Templi Orientis** - Not always a month to month commitment
    but I do like to go to Gnostic Mass when I can, attend the
    appropriate initiation ceremonies for community members and be
    somewhat involved. I have an outstanding degree that I can apply for
    when I decide it is time to do so as well.
-   **Dzogchen Community** - There is a local branch of Namkhai Norbus'
    *Dzogchen Community* here in Seattle. It isn't super active most of
    the time but they generally do a ganapuja on the full moons (as
    measured on the Tibetan Calendar) and I want to make a regular
    presence there. On a personal level, I'm trying to integrate the
    medium Tun ritual, which is basic Dzogchen ritual work, into my
    regular practice.
-   **Unnamed Wiccan Training Group** - This is what I speak about
    above. No details about this yet but I expect that it will meet a
    couple of times a month (perhaps even weekly, I don't know) and will
    also involve a bit of work outside of meetings.
-   **Queen Anne Masonic Temple** - Assuming my application is accepted
    and I am initiated, I know that QAMT meets on at least once a month
    and I would want to make a regular presence there as I study the
    masonic material.
-   **McNeil Island Wiccan Ministry** - and I are going out once a month
    for a study group or class with the inmates at this facility with
    the occasional celebrations of Sabbats and the annual feast. This is
    an ongoing commitment and I'd like to make sure that we provide the
    guys with the best possible help.
-   **Seattle Salon** - This is the proposed discussion group on magical
    topics that and I have begun organizing. This doesn't meet yet but
    there will be a monthly discussion going here.

Hmm... That seems like quite a bit of stuff. Luckily, some of them are
only once a month sorts of things so it isn't like I have to meet with
all of these groups every week or two.
