---
author: admin
date: '2004-11-24 00:23:52'
layout: post
slug: dead-man
status: publish
title: Dead Man
wordpress_id: '292'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

R and I watched **Dead Man** this evening, starring Johnny Depp and with
a cast of notable side characters (including Iggy Pop in a bonnet and a
dress). I'd missed seeing this, somehow, over the years. I liked it
quite a bit though the pacing was very slow in a way. Definitely worth
watching though.

Last night, I went to a dinner with my immediate peers from work and our
boss. There are four of us who work closely together as peers under our
boss. This was a dinner to get us together in a more relaxed environment
to discuss work issues and otherwise think about problems. Because of a
snafu the other week, most of us also went out to dinner two weeks ago.
Combining this with my trip to LA last week (with my boss and another
coworker) and I think I'm pretty talked out when it comes to spending
lots of quality time with coworkers. This isn't to speak ill of anyone.
By and large, I like my coworkers and my boss isn't always a hardcase
but, as an introvert almost-only child, I get tired of having to talk to
people on demand and it can be very draining. I tend to like to do
things on my own timing, schedule or terms. Being in management doesn't
really allow for this a lot of the time so I get to work outside my
comfort zone. This long weekend away from everyone will be a good chance
to unwind from everything.

Turkey Day will be at Tylik's house, as normal for us. I'm bringing the
mashed taters. Food should be good and I haven't seen her or the others
there in a fair bit (not counting my wedding). Saturday is Wiccan Inmate
Day at McNeil Island so I'll be spending some time with the boys there.
It should be fairly good. I'd like to get a chance to see **Alexander**
in the next few days as well.

Also, I signed up for my first courses in my Master's program today.
**Woo-hoo!** They are graduate level History (or Theory of History) and
Philosophy classes. These will start up in early January. I'm looking
forward to the program even if it will be quite a bit of work over the
next couple of years. Maybe when I'm done I'll be ready to write those
few books that my friends have been encouraging me to do for a while.
We'll see.
