---
author: admin
date: '2004-09-18 00:15:03'
layout: post
slug: kitty-cancer
status: publish
title: Kitty Cancer
wordpress_id: '237'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

My cat has breast cancer. I noticed a smallish lump (or something) in
Freya's belly a while back but didn't think much of it at the time as
she has long hair and difficulty cleaning herself well at time. She gets
knots in her hair and needs to have things brushed out and she's not big
on having her belly brushed. Recently, I noticed that there was a much
larger mass along her left side and it seemed to be subdermal and solid.

I took her to the vet this week and they examined the lump and took some
samples. They ran some tests and they came back as the vet expected:
cancer. It's in her mammary glands, both the upper and lower sets, on
the left side. He found another smallish lump at the top of the right
side so it has spread.

I'm taking her in for x-rays next week. We have to see if it has
metastasized and spread to other parts of her body or if it is just in
the glands. This type of cancer is almost always malignant. If it hasn't
spread, I can have surgery to open her up and remove all of that tissue,
though it stretches the full length of one side. I haven't made up my
mind of what to do.

Money isn't the issue but I also don't want to spend massive money if it
is going to impact her quality of life and just put something off. We'll
see what the x-rays say. I raised her from a kitten, the first cat that
I have ever had its entire life (expect for about a year or so in the
middle). She's not a terribly lovey cat and, frankly, she's kind of a
bitch calico kitty but she's been my responsibility.

I'm not sure how I feel about the whole thing.
