---
author: admin
date: '2004-01-25 12:25:00'
layout: post
slug: warren-ellis-2
status: publish
title: Warren Ellis
wordpress_id: '31'
categories:
- Humor
- Science Fiction
---

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/nn020510.jpg) Sometimes I read
the stuff that Warren Ellis
([http://www.diepunyhumans.com](http://www.diepunyhumans.com/) and
[http://www.livejournal.com/users/mistersleepless](http://www.livejournal.com/mistersleepless))
writes and think to myself, "Whoa! This guy must have had some rather
whacked out childhood or something. He's got serious issues." On
reflection, though, I must assume that Warren had a completely normal
childhood and that there is no intrinsic explanation there for his
borderline schizophrenia. He's just a whacked out guy for his own
reasons. This is along some of the same lines of thought that I had
about Clive Barker in the past. Then I read an interview with his
parents and, gods, they were about as normal and humdrum as you can get.
They obviously loved their son but had no idea why he had such weird
things in his head. In any case, I shouldn't complain about Warren. I
like much, if not almost all, of what he writes. What does this say
about me? Last week, I picked up the new graphic novel of the first six
issues of "[Global Frequency](http://www.globalfrequency.org/)" and, the
week before, his collection of columns "[Come in
Alone](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0970936001/)" about
comics and his weird thoughts. I'm looking forward to the novel (as yet
unnamed) that he wrote this last year and other non-comic work of his. I
think he has a lot of fun potential as an artist and I think Warren
channeling Spider Jerusalem is one of the best things since Hunter S.
Thompson got old-fashioned.
