---
author: admin
date: '2004-04-06 00:06:00'
layout: post
slug: family-geeks
status: publish
title: Family Geeks
wordpress_id: '82'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Madeline's birthday part (late) was yesterday at my grandparents'
retirement community. As it turns out, my Uncle George, his two sons,
and his wife, Roe, are in town for the week. They came by the party and
we got to speak for a while. My cousins are almost a generation behind
me in age (one is 16, the other is just recently 13) and the elder is
winner of the who-is-geekiest-in-the-family probably now. He's shot up
two feet in the last couple of years and is a lot more vocal than he was
the last time I spoke to him. He's been doing advanced placement classes
for a couple of years and programming since he was 12 or so. He's
already getting feelers and potential offers from Caltech and MIT. I
spoke to him about this for a bit and he seems undecided. "I might go to
NYU and study film... I like film too..." (though he loves computer
science and math). I asked him if he had an offer from NYU (knowing he
didn't) and he said as much. Resisting the urge to smack him upside the
head, I encouraged him to go to MIT or Caltech unless he felt really
driven to do film. If they are offering him the potential of a free ride
at a big name engineering school, he should take it! I'm giving him
advice that I should have gotten somewhere along the way but he'll
probably ignore it. R and I invited George, Roe and the boys over after
work this evening and they came over for a couple of hours. We sat and
chatted, which was quite pleasent. It's kind of funny. My uncle is a
Christian (Wesleyen) minister and a professional missionary for his
church. That being said, he's the most intelligent and normal person in
my family of his generation. My mom (hi!!) is probably smarter but
George managed, it seems, to find that sweet spot between being
intelligent but difficult (like my mother and me) and generally
agreeable and nice but a little average (like his younger brother). He's
smart, he's got an MA (and a Doctor of Divinity, I think). He and I were
speaking about books this evening and he discussed a history of the
CIA's involvement in establishing the Shah in Iran and its political
events that he's reading right now. Not typical missionary fare. He gets
points for being non-reactive to my overtly pagan and buddhist artwork
on the walls and mantle. I don't know if he didn't notice or was polite
enough not to worry about the four statues three feet from him but he
couldn't have missed the four foot thangka of Mahakala on the wall or
the framed picture of the Tree of Life by the stairs. I generally get
the sense that he's willing to let things be and not feel the urge to
convert me that would set me off at him. I was always closest to his
little brother, Karl, who is only nine years older than me, but Karl's
tried to convert my brother away from paganism when Lee was a kid and
generally similar behavior at various points. I have a feeling that, if
I chose to cultivate it, I could easily be decent friends with my Uncle
George even though he lives on the other side of the country.
Intelligence and willingness to let people do their thing wins points
with me. In any case, I chatted a bit with my cousins, Eric and Evan, as
well. Eric, the older one, tried to pull a fast one and do a Microsoft
logic problem on me that a friend of his online had given him. It was a
basic exchange problem and I recognized the type of it but I declined to
play that game. Instead, I grabbed my little whiteboard and started
giving **him** some of my interview logic problems (including everyone
in the room in the process). The really scary thing is he almost
instantly recognized the basic nature of one of my classic problems and
this is a problem that I almost never have people get immediately. If
his brother hadn't been yabbering away at his ear throwing him off with
false starts, he would have solved it in under two minutes. That has
happened only once in my experience. Even funnier, my uncle pretty much
figured it out quickly as well but neither of the boys listened to him
when they were arguing with each other. :-) I did a couple of more and
Eric actually did quite well. I need to get him into an internship at
Microsoft or something. He's geeky enough to make me feel slow and he's
16. Give him an engineering degree and some seasoning and maturity and
he'll wipe the floor with people. All that and he's still personable.
It's good to know that the geek gene is expressed in every generation.
Our grandfather (the Boeing Engineer) should be proud.
