---
author: admin
date: '2004-05-10 15:39:00'
layout: post
slug: army-times-calls-for-rumsfields-head
status: publish
title: Army Times calls for Rumsfield's Head
wordpress_id: '102'
categories:
- Society
---

You know it is bad when the unofficial paper of the Army wants your ass.

[http://www.armytimes.com/story.php?f=1-292925-2903288.php](http://www.armytimes.com/story.php?f=1-292925-2903288.php)

**Editorial: A failure of leadership at the highest levels**\
\
 Around the halls of the Pentagon, a term of caustic derision has
emerged for the enlisted soldiers at the heart of the furor over the Abu
Ghraib prison scandal: the six morons who lost the war.

Indeed, the damage done to the U.S. military and the nation as a whole
by the horrifying photographs of U.S. soldiers abusing Iraqi detainees
at the notorious prison is incalculable.

But the folks in the Pentagon are talking about the wrong morons.

There is no excuse for the behavior displayed by soldiers in the
now-infamous pictures and an even more damning report by Army Maj. Gen.
Antonio Taguba. Every soldier involved should be ashamed.

But while responsibility begins with the six soldiers facing criminal
charges, it extends all the way up the chain of command to the highest
reaches of the military hierarchy and its civilian leadership.

The entire affair is a failure of leadership from start to finish. From
the moment they are captured, prisoners are hooded, shackled and
isolated. The message to the troops: Anything goes.

In addition to the scores of prisoners who were humiliated and demeaned,
at least 14 have died in custody in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army has
ruled at least two of those homicides. This is not the way a free people
keeps its captives or wins the hearts and minds of a suspicious world.

How tragically ironic that the American military, which was welcomed to
Baghdad by the euphoric Iraqi people a year ago as a liberating force
that ended 30 years of tyranny, would today stand guilty of dehumanizing
torture in the same Abu Ghraib prison used by Saddam Hussein's henchmen.

One can only wonder why the prison wasn't razed in the wake of the
invasion as a symbolic stake through the heart of the Baathist regime.

Army commanders in Iraq bear responsibility for running a prison where
there was no legal adviser to the commander, and no ultimate
responsibility taken for the care and treatment of the prisoners.

Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs, also shares in the
shame. Myers asked “60 Minutes II” to hold off reporting news of the
scandal because it could put U.S. troops at risk. But when the report
was aired, a week later, Myers still hadn't read Taguba's report, which
had been completed in March. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld also
failed to read the report until after the scandal broke in the media.

By then, of course, it was too late.

Myers, Rumsfeld and their staffs failed to recognize the impact the
scandal would have not only in the United States, but around the world.

If their staffs failed to alert Myers and Rumsfeld, shame on them. But
shame, too, on the chairman and secretary, who failed to inform even
President Bush.

He was left to learn of the explosive scandal from media reports instead
of from his own military leaders.

On the battlefield, Myers' and Rumsfeld's errors would be called a lack
of situational awareness — a failure that amounts to professional
negligence.

To date, the Army has moved to court-martial the six soldiers suspected
of abusing Iraqi detainees and has reprimanded six others.

Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski, who commanded the MP brigade that ran Abu
Ghraib, has received a letter of admonishment and also faces possible
disciplinary action.

That's good, but not good enough.

This was not just a failure of leadership at the local command level.
This was a failure that ran straight to the top. Accountability here is
essential — even if that means relieving top leaders from duty in a time
of war.

*— Military Times editorial, May 17 issue*
