---
author: admin
date: '2004-06-06 23:15:00'
layout: post
slug: the-christian-right-cyberspace-and-pagans
status: publish
title: The Christian Right, Cyberspace and Pagans!
wordpress_id: '134'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

This is just precious.

[http://www.equip.org/free/DC228.htm](http://www.khephra.org/ct.ashx?id=c0c36888-a354-41c4-b160-1827356badea&amp;url=http://www.equip.org/free/DC228.htm)

## **TECHNOSHAMANISM:**Digital Deities in Cyberspace

by Douglas Groothuis

**Summary**

Spiritual explorers are increasingly looking to cyberspace to meet the
needs of the soul. Many neopagans, occultists, and New Agers deem the
technologies of cyberspace as fitting media for their magical
experiments and rituals and view the Internet as a mystical plane of
being. For some in this movement, which has roots in the counterculture
of the sixties, both hallucinogenic drugs and computers help to
demonstrate that reality is strictly a matter of our own perception and
therefore can be manipulated and even created. However, this enthusiasm
for the mystical potential of human technology is misplaced, illogical,
and spiritually dangerous. It vainly attempts to build a spiritual
reality on the faulty foundation of silicon, instead of on Jesus Christ.

Cyberspace is the hot contemporary term for computer-mediated
communication, the burgeoning new world of e-mail, databases, virtual
reality, word-processing, computer games, and a raft of culture-shaping,
digital technologies. The backbone of cyberspace is the Internet, an
international computer system linking individual computers through phone
lines.

Being the incorrigibly spiritual creatures that humans made in God's
image are, many people are attempting to use cyberspace to feed and
stretch the soul. A new movement is forming that views cyberspace as a
sacred realm for the expansion of consciousness. Working from neopagan,
occult, and New Age assumptions, technoshamans claim they are the wired
wizards of the digital world (shamanism and technoshamanism will be
defined in detail later). As this strange phenomenon unfolds, Christians
need to address it theologically and biblically if we are to reach
today's technological culture effectively with the message of Jesus
Christ. \
 \

**TIMOTHY LEARY AND GENERATION X**

Timothy Leary is dead, but he lives on in cyberspace. On the Internet,
the Timothy Leary home page explains: "Just after midnight, in his
favorite bed among loving friends, Timothy Leary peacefully passed on.
His lasts words were ‘why not?' and ‘yeah.'" Leary, who had been
terminally ill for several months, had considered committing suicide via
a live feed through the Worldwide Web. Instead, Leary kept visitors at
his site informed on his declining condition and philosophized freely
about it, claiming he had no fear of death. In 1995 he had announced he
was "thrilled" to learn he had terminal prostate cancer and remarked,
"How you die is the most important thing you ever do. It's the exit."^1^
As Leary himself put it, he died a "designer death," displayed in
cyberspace for all to access.

In recent years, Leary's emphasis moved from hallucinogenic drugs, which
he never renounced, to the mind-expanding possibilities of cyberspace.
*The New York Times*reported that in the weeks before his death Leary
handled many interviews in order "to market his estate and its provision
for the maintenance of his [Internet] Web site."^2^

Although in his 70s, Leary attracted the attention not only of aging
Grateful Deadheads, but of Generation X (or the Baby Busters) as well.
His fame spread to both hippies and hackers, and the overlap between the
two. Leary is featured prominently in Douglas Rushkoff's offbeat
manifesto, *Cyberia: Life in the Trenches of Hyperspace.*^3^ Rushkoff
tells us that cyberians (the younger denizens of cyberspace) who use
"drugs do not need to learn that reality is arbitrary and manipulable,
or that the landscape of consciousness is broader than normal
waking-state awareness suggests" because they have already learned these
things from Leary and the psychedelic author Ken Kesey.^4^ Rushkoff, a
20-something guru for Generation X, eulogized Leary on Leary's home
page, saying, "Tim's whole trip — from psychedelics to computers to
designer dying — was to communicate the fact that people are capable of
taking charge of their own brains, hearts, and spirits."^5^

Leary's later years were dedicated to leading the march into cyberspace
as a zone for unlimited human potential. He believed virtual reality
experiences and on-line communications could serve the same purposes as
hallucinogenic drugs. Leary modified his famous credo of the 1960s,
"Tune in, turn on, and drop out," to "Turn on, boot up, and jack in,"
and proclaimed that "PC [personal computing] is the LSD of the
1990s."^6^ It was not an either/or for Leary; in a 1995 interview in the
on-line magazine *HotWired*, he admitted to having taken LSD three
months earlier.^7^

Leary and Rushkoff have further suggested that the 1960s' psychedelic
experimentation and interest in Eastern religions directly influenced
the development of modern computers and cyberspace. According to Leary,
Apple Computer cofounder, Steven Jobs, "went to India, took a lot of
acid, [and] studied Buddhism," while Bill Gates, cofounder of Microsoft,
"was a big psychedelic person at Harvard." Leary explained that "it
makes perfect sense to me that if you activate your brain with
psychedelic drugs, the only way you can describe it is
electronically."^8^ Rushkoff claims that "psychedelics are a given in
Silicon Valley. They are as established as Intel, Stanford, marriage, or
religion. The infrastructure has accommodated them."^9^\
 \

**CYBERSPACE AND THE COUNTERCULTURE**

The continuing popularity of Leary and the countercultural ethos is not
just a retrotrend or a dip into hippie nostalgia. Many of those
advocating technoshamanism in one form or another are survivors from the
sixties. Besides Leary, these include Stewart Brand, ex-hippie and
editor of *The Whole Earth Catalogue*, and John Perry Barlow, lyricist
for the Grateful Dead and an outspoken advocate of computer rights
through the Electronic Frontiers Foundation, which he helped found.^10^

Many of the beliefs and sensibilities of the counterculture have made
their way through the seventies and eighties and into much of the
cyberculture of the nineties. The political rebellion and spiritual
experimentation of the sixties counterculture tended to be ambivalent at
best toward technology, with the exception of stereo sound systems and
chemically synthesized drugs such as LSD. As cyberpunk science fiction
writer Bruce Sterling quipped, "No counterculture Earth Mother gave us
lysergic acid [LSD] — it came from a Sandoz lab."^11^ But by and large,
the countercultural rejection of Western culture brought into question
the "military-industrial complex" and its animating technocracy.

Although opponents of technology are not extinct, the more common
attitude has been to integrate and mystify new technologies into a
nonmaterialistic and non-Christian world view. Mark Dery summarizes the
marriage of cyberspace technologies to psychedelic orientation
(cyberdelia) in this way: "Cyberdelia reconciles the transcendentalist
impulses of sixties' counterculture with the infomania of the nineties.
As well, it nods in passing to the seventies, from which it borrows the
millenarian mysticism of the New Age."^12^

The mystification of technology loomed large in Rushkoff's interview of
Britt Welin, a follower of Terence McKenna. Heir-apparent of the Timothy
Leary legacy, McKenna is prone to such metaphysically melodramatic
utterances as, "I think every person who takes five or six grams of
psilocybin mushrooms in silent darkness is probably on a par with Christ
and Buddha, at least in terms of input."^13^ Meanwhile, Britt Welin is
both an acid head and a cyberspace explorer. She adopts the idea of
"technoanimism" and urges people to "think of technology itself as an
animistic dynamic that filters through the individual machines, being an
over spirit to them — an animistic spirit that's way beyond what humans
are comprehending on their own level."^14^ Welin claims that when one is
on psychedelic drugs "and you tune into a cyberspace environment, you
lose your parameters and you find yourself entirely within the
electronic environment."^15^ Welin's husband, Ken, also strives for
union with cyberspace. He says, "Our video-computer system's set up to
ease us into a level of intimacy where we can use it in a transparent
sense" and "enter into a trance relationship with it." It then "ends up
having a spiritlike existence."^16^

According to Erik Davis, the labyrinthine recesses of cyberspace, with
its unfathomable complexities and strange potencies, "may soon appear to
be as strangely sentient as the caves, lakes, and forests in which the
first magicians glimpsed the gods."^17^ To the sacred and mysterious
natural spaces of unwired ancient animists we may now add the sacred and
mysterious cyberspaces of the wired modern animists. Leary and a
cowriter saw computers as fulfilling the goal of "magick" as defined by
archoccultist Aleister Crowley: "The art and science of causing change
to occur in conformity with our will."^18^\
 \

**THE NEW AGE DAWNS — AGAIN**

The yearning for a New Age to spring from the divine depths of human
consciousness is hardly new. It is an ancient aspiration, an occultic
orientation to the divine, the world, and the self that sees them all as
part of one ultimate reality.^19^ The new spin on the old view is the
addition of cybertechnologies as significant aids in the process of
self-discovery or even as the manifestation of the New Age itself. Some
technovisionaries, such as John Perry Barlow, invoke the evolutionary
scenario of French Jesuit thinker and paleontologist, Pierre Teilhard de
Chardin, to ground their viewpoint.^20^Teilhard saw evolution as the
fundamental category for all existence. He used this model of reality,
which he spiritualized, to transcend naturalism and to reinterpret all
the foundational doctrines and symbols of the Christian faith. Instead
of the literal second coming of Jesus at the end of the age, he
predicted the emergence of the noosphere (or mind-sphere), a level of
unified consciousness that would, in essence, make the entire planet
divine. This "noogenesis" would eventuate in the Omega Point — the end
of history and culmination of cosmic evolution.^21^

Teilhard died in obscurity in 1955, far before the cyberspace
revolution, but various thinkers surmise that cyberspace is the
noosphere, believing that Teilhard may have had some inkling of the
technologies to come.^22^ Barlow sees the eventual coming of a Cosmic
Mind presaged even in something as pedestrian as e-mail: "Watching
e-mail messages come and go can give you a holy sense of mission. It's
synaptic firing, across the web of a slowly evolving nervous system. In
a couple of hundred years, every synapse on this planet will be
continuously and seamlessly connected to every other synapse on the
planet. One great wad of mind."^23^

Jean Houston, a New Age consciousness researcher and spiritual advisor
to Hillary Clinton, said she frequently uses the Internet to converse
with Green parties around the world as well as to indulge in the fantasy
role-playing game, Dungeons and Dragons. "It's an extraordinary
confluence of consciousness. Teilhard's noosphere is alive and
well."^24^ \
 \

**SHAMANS WITH MODEMS**

Whether or not this "extraordinary confluence of consciousness" in
cyberspace is identified with the noosphere, a raft of technopagans are
tapping into cyberspace as a realm for mystical discovery, magical
powers, and evolutionary advancement. The use of cyberspace for these
ends is often called technoshamanism.

Technoshamanism, in all its permutations, is more than the latest fad
from San Francisco — although a high concentration of such activity is
located there. While not an organized movement, it represents a growing
cultural trend to deify cyberspace. The tribal shaman of ancient, pagan
religions was a mediator between the spiritual and material worlds, who
experienced mystical ecstasies and initiated others into the same
communion with higher powers.^25^ Technoshamanism eliminates the
middleman — although it is not without visionaries, philosophers, and
programmers — and offers mystical connections in cyberspace possible to
everyone with a modem. Anyone can be a (techno)shaman.

The essence of technoshamanism may be summarized in this statement by a
pagan practitioner: "May the astral plane be reborn in cyberspace."^26^
In an extensive article on technopagans, Erik Davis sees parallels
between the notion of magic as "the science of the imagination, the art
of engineering consciousness and discovering the virtual forces that
connect the mind-body with the physical world," and "our dizzyingly
digital environment" of cyberspace technologies involving on-line
fantasy role-playing games and other new, mind-expanding devices.^27^
Technopagans believe these technologies can serve as occultic sacraments
in the digital age, because technopagans "honor technology as part of
the circle of human life, a life that for Pagans is already divine."^28^

Mark Pesce, a self-confessed technopagan, claims that both "cyberspace
and magical space are purely manifest in the imagination. Both spaces
are entirely constructed by your thoughts and beliefs."^29^ The
pantheism–animism–polytheism mix is expressed when Pesce explains, "I
think computers can be as sacred as we are, because they can embody our
communication with each other and with the entities — the divine parts
of ourselves — that we invoke in that space."^30^ In his mind,
cyberspace is pictured as "the computer equivalent of holography, in
which every part of a fragment represents the greater whole."^31^ Pesce
later concluded that the Internet's ability to form a myriad of
electronic connections corresponds with the Eastern idea of the net of
the Indian goddess Indra, in which each jewel reflects every other
jewel.^32^ The analogy, however, is flawed, since every point in
cyberspace does not connect with, let alone reflect, every other point.

Technopagans are also attracted to the idea of cybersex (simulated
on-line sex) and gender morphing (assuming alternative sexual identities
on-line). A woman named legba (sic), a witch, enjoys cybersex and
morphing because "they can be intensely magical. It's a very, very easy
way of shapechanging." Legba likens this to the traditional shamans, who
she says are "between genders, or doubly gendered." Moreover, "morphing
and net.sex can have an intensity and unsettling effect on the psyche,
one that enables the ecstatic state from which Pagan magic is done."^33^

Another pagan, Tyagi Nagasiva, has "cobbled together his own mythic
structures, divination systems, and rituals — an eclectic spirituality
well suited to the Net's culture of complex interaction."^34^ Nagasiva
engages in "chaos magic," in which participants do not rigidly follow
the occult tradition, but create their own rules or ignore them
altogether, "spontaneously enacting rituals that break through fixed
mental categories and evoke unknown — and often terrifying — entities
and experiences."^35^He claims that most pagans get on-line to
coordinate rituals they then practice in real life, whereas chaos
magicians say, "Let's do the ritual [itself] online."^36^ Nagasiva
inhabits this ritual space from four to six hours a day.\
 \

**THE PROBLEM WITH DIGITAL DEITIES**

Technoshamanism attempts to sacralize silicon, to find mystery in the
works that our hands have made. Because of the influence of strange and
sometimes wonderful computer technologies, those not availing themselves
of God's own revelation in Christ and the Scriptures will seek
revelations as they can.^37^ Apart from God, where better to seek
revelations than cyberspace? It's as close as the keyboard and as
esoteric as the Internet. It can be as engrossing as any technology in
existence. Its mysteries beckon exploration and its potentials are not
fully known. Through its massive connectivity it offers a kind of *visio
dei* — a God's-eye vision of endless data through the dimensions of
cyberspace. This explains the aspiration of Jobe from the movie
*Lawnmower Man*, who, having tasted the powers of computers, wanted to
incorporate all knowledge into himself by becoming one with cyberspace.
In his words, he would become a "cyber-Christ" (although in the end he
acted more akin to a cyber-Satan).

Heim rightly comments, "Our love affair with computers, computer
graphics, and computer networks runs deeper than aesthetic fascination
and deeper than the play of the senses. We are searching for a home for
the mind and heart....The world rendered as pure information not only
fascinates our eyes and minds, but also captures our hearts. We feel
augmented and empowered. Our hearts beat in the machines."^38^ Of
course, the same description can be given for any form of idolatry. As
the Jewish philosopher Abraham Heschel commented, the existence of idols
bears a perverse testimony to our need for the divine. If we will not
accept the divine on its own terms, we will create fascinating and
mystifying surrogates that take on a life of their own, becoming an
entrancing mystery we cannot easily resist.^39^

In some ways, even the sacred grove seems tame compared with the
technological wizardry of cyberspace environments. When we "turn on, log
on, and jack in," we feel linked to a larger reality that transcends the
finitude and frailty of our off-line lives. Yet this reality is only
virtual — the work of human minds and hands — however much it may absorb
its practitioners into itself. It is a projection or extension of
humanity, a medium for a myriad of messages. As such, it cannot grant
final satisfaction to the soul.\
 \

**THE DANGERS OF MAGIC AND THE OCCULT**

Magic, unlike revealed religion, has always sought initiation into a
higher state of consciousness in order to manipulate reality through the
acquisition of arcane powers. The logic of magic is really one coping
mechanism of fallen beings who perceive their insufficiency in a cursed
world, yet who refuse to submit to either God's personal rule or fate's
impersonal dominance. Magicians covet the power to create their own
reality through spiritual technologies of all kinds — whether
incantations, visualizations, rituals, or on-line environments. The goal
is the attaining of power over an otherwise resistant reality that dooms
us to degeneration, disease, and ultimately death. Magic attempts to
undo the effects of the Fall apart from grace by attempting to conquer
the effects of sin apart from the Savior. It seeks power from below
instead of grace from above.^40^

Such occult power-mongering, either on-line or off-line, is nothing less
than rebellion against the Creator and an invitation to the dark powers
that masquerade as light, whether or not the magicians believe in Satan
and demons. God's prohibition of magic and the occult flows from a
jealous love for His creatures.^41^Since the eternal and uncreated God
is the source of all value, meaning, and excellence, any defection from
His divine counsel results in alienation from His benefits. Into this
void rushes the counterfeit of a deified creation, pressed into a
spiritual service it cannot discharge — the salvation of the soul. Given
the spiritual impotence of the creation to save itself, the demonic
world finds its opportunity to pose as divine, offering a "counterfeit
infinity" in place of the true God.^42^ Paul warned that "Satan himself
masquerades as an angel of light" (2 Cor. 11:14), and Jesus admonished
us to remember that the devil "is a liar and the father of lies" (John
8:44).

Although cyberspace technologies in themselves need not be demonic, they
easily become conduits of deception and distortion when appropriated by
the pagan practitioner, since their simulations are so seductive and
their magnetism is so compelling. Because such technologies facilitate
the construction of artificial environments, they can be a particularly
powerful tool in the hands of cybermagicians who long to "create their
own reality" one way or another.

Earlier quotes by technopagans referred to unspecified "entities"
contacted through cyberrituals. This does not describe human
participants, but spiritual beings. Through the centuries occultists
have used visualization, drugs, and meditation to contact creatures
otherwise aloof and invisible. In light of the imaginative occult
environs frequented by technopagans in cyberspace, it would be no
surprise if this medium should attract less than angelic agents, who,
like opportunistic infections, will exploit any opening they can
find.^43^ Rushkoff speaks of a technopagan named Green Fire who worries
that his cyberspiritual adventures "could lead me to a place that I
wouldn't want to be. It's like a puzzle or a maze and I could get lost."
Green Fire warns, "Magic is a dangerous thing. There is a new age belief
that you can never get hurt; that's not true. You can get hurt very
bad."^44^ This echoes the testimonies of many who have been burned by
the occult. It is neither tame nor good.\
 \

**UNMASKING THE PSYCHEDELIC APOLOGETIC**

Leary and Rushkoff have claimed that some who used hallucinogenic drugs
were also inspired to create advanced computer technologies. They also
have contended that the combination of cyberspace exploration and the
ongoing use of hallucinogens is crucial to awakening a higher
consciousness that will be instrumental in bringing down the oppressive,
dominant society and building a better one. This apologetic is more
virtual than real for several reasons.

First, although some superstars such as Bill Gates and Steven Jobs may
have used LSD and become technological innovators, this fails to
establish either that LSD was the cause of their intellectual
breakthroughs or that most people who ingest hallucinogenic drugs would
have similar experiences. Gates and Jobs are both highly intelligent
people, who probably would have come up with their ideas with or without
hallucinogens. In any event, it would be very difficult to prove that
mind-altering drugs were the cause for their success. A visit to
People's Park in Berkeley, California, will reveal any number of acid
heads whose trips led them to homelessness and insanity and not to the
forefront of cyberspace.

Second, even if for the sake of argument we granted that the use of
hallucinogenic drugs was instrumental in the computer revolution, this
would not prove that the computer revolution is an unmitigated good or
that the world view generated by hallucinogenic drugs is true. The
technologies created by the likes of Jobs and Gates are not cornucopias
of pure blessing. There is a dark side to them that is all too often
ignored in the bright lights of cyberculture (e.g., the emergence and
easy accessibility of "cyberporn").

Moreover, various experiences can produce beliefs that "work" or are
"successful," yet do not truly correspond to reality. Someone may
believe she misplaced five hundred dollars because of carelessness. She
then reforms her life and becomes an affluent businesswoman. The idea
that she lost the money "worked" for her. Yet, as she learns later, the
money was stolen, not misplaced. Her belief, then, was false, even if it
was beneficial.^45^ Similarly, a hallucinogenic experience might be
credited for some discovery in computer technology, but this, in itself,
does not establish the truth of monism, pantheism, animism, or
polytheism — world views that often (but not always) come through these
experiences.

We should consider a key difference in terminology. While technopagans
prefer the word *psychedelic*, the term *hallucinogenic*for the same
drugs is more appropriate. A hallucinogen is understood to be a drug
that induces a hallucination — an essentially deceptive experience that
seems very real. The assumption behind this term is that our normal
thought processes and sensory capacities are better guides to objective
reality than a chemically induced experience, because the artificially
altered mind is not necessarily the illuminated mind. A psychedelic
drug, on the other hand, is believed to intensify sensory perception,
ostensibly revealing a reality that was previously unknown or
unexperienced without the aid of the chemical catalyst; it is
mind-expanding, not just mind-altering.^46^ Each term is heavily
weighted with philosophical assumptions.

Historically, the use of drugs for purposes of religious enlightenment
has been associated with religions outside of Christianity and
monotheism. The assumption behind the use of psychedelics is that
through a transformation of consciousness one can — without divine
mediation or revelation — directly intuit the mysteries of the cosmos.
Christianity teaches that, since humans are both finite and fallen, they
have no such capacities — either on or off drugs. As Paul confessed,
"For there is one God; there is also one mediator between God and
humankind, Christ Jesus, himself human who gave himself a ransom for
all" (1 Tim. 2:5-6, *NRSV*).\
 \

**TECHNOSHAMANISM AGAINST MONOTHEISM**

The world view of technoshamanism tends toward pantheistic monism,
animism, and polytheism. Pantheistic monism is the most natural platform
for all occultism because it affirms that we are ultimately one with the
one divine reality and have recourse to its powers through psychic
techniques. Within this system, however, a variety of entities or
energies are recognized as emanations or manifestations of the one
reality. Hence, a kind of operational animism or polytheism is the
cousin of pantheistic monism, however illogical it may be to introduce a
multiplicity of entities into an absolute unity.

Tal Brooke, a writer on new religious movements, believes that
cyberspace "by its very unitive structure, tends toward a kind of
functional pantheism."^47^ This seems to be the case for many who are
already inclined toward the occult to various degrees, but cyberspace by
nature does not demand a monistic interpretation. Christians should see
cyberspace as a communications medium that shapes its contents in a
bewildering variety of ways and so affects our selves and our culture.
Our orientation toward the medium is crucial.

Leary and his cohorts have long despised monotheism, Christian or
otherwise. In 1980 I heard Timothy Leary deliver a lecture (if one could
so dignify it) in which he referred to the Judeo-Christian God as "the
hanging judge God," who must be denied, because "reality is no larger
than your mind." This kind of exuberant blasphemy, coupled with a
romantic solipsism, is evident in the reincarnations of Leary's views,
expressed in Rushkoff's description of the cyberians.

The cyberian world view is shaped by the sensibilities of modern
technologies, particularly those of cyberspace. Rushkoff asserts,
"According to cyberian logic, the grids of reality are creations. They
are not necessarily real....Anyone who has taken a psychedelic drug
experiences this. Fantasy gamers play with this. Hackers who crack the
‘ice' of well-protected computer networks prove this. Anyone who has
adopted the cyberian vision lives this."^48^ Rushkoff adds that
cyberians rebel against dominant society not by crossing lines and
breaking out of boxes, but by refusing to grant the reality of any lines
or boxes. "The exploitation of these lines and boxes for fun is like
playing hopscotch on the tablets of the Ten Commandments."^49^ God as
Lawgiver is off the screen.\
 \

**AFTER TRUTH, NOTHING**

Modern technopagans tend to be less awed than their ancient ancestors by
the ultimate mysteries of the cosmos, because they have, in good
postmodernist fashion, abandoned the classic conception of truth and are
simply playing with various contortions of consciousness. This
assumption permeates Rushkoff's account of the cyberian world view.
Experiencing cyberspace and hallucinogens frees us from the tyranny of
objective reality, meaning, and logic. Cyberians "have abandoned
organized rules of logic in favor of reality hacking — riding the waves,
watching for trends, keeping an open mind, and staying connected to the
flow."^50^ By "reality hacking," Rushkoff means viewing life as a game
to be played according to one's own rules: "Once all templates or
characters become interchangeable, the gamer can ‘infer' reality,
because he has the ability to see it from any point of view he
chooses."^51^ The arbitrarily arranged rules of the computer game serve
as a model of the universe at large. You make it up as you go along.

Reality hacking and the desire for a designer reality spun out of one's
own head (via the proper hardware and software) rule out the notion of
any fixed, final, and authoritative conception of reality. Reality moves
from the objective singular to the subjective plural: there are many
realities; hack the one you want. Yet in the same breath, Rushkoff's
cyberians and technopagans speak of reality as One (monism) and the
divine as universally dispersed in everything (pantheism). They also
sound animistic or polytheistic when they speak of particular spirits
inhabiting computers. Rushkoff even appeals to avant-garde theories in
science for rational justification of his world view. In so doing, he
contradicts himself, since he also says that there is "no such thing as
nonfiction, only points of view."^52^

Reality hacking without belief in an objective reality that can be
reached hollows out any claim of possessing a coherent, intellectually
superior world view. It leaves only the rattling shells of arbitrary
assertions. This high-tech relativism really boils down to a very noisy,
cybercharged nihilism, which employs mystical and magical terms to
obscure its inner bankruptcy. This deception is what Francis Schaeffer
called "semantic mysticism." Positive and engaging terms are used to
cover up the emptiness of the world view itself.^53^

Furthermore, if the technoshamanistic world view rejects any absolute
moral authority by opting for relativism, it unleashes an amoral anarchy
impossible to restrain by the resources of its own thought. Technopagans
may enjoy "playing hopscotch on the Ten Commandants," as Rushkoff says,
but they will offer passionate protest when someone sends a
hard-disc-eating virus into their new computer system or pirates their
software. Similarly, they *morally* object to the supposedly oppressive
and dogmatic views of conservative Christians.

Such moral indignation has no foundation, given their world view. It
consists of mere assertions. Having abandoned logic as a test for truth,
they are left with no reliable criteria for deciding which wave to surf
or which trend to follow. How about hacking the neo-Nazi version of
paganism (which is resurgent in Germany and elsewhere), or being
open-minded about joining the ranks of the sexual predators who easily
and happily move from virtual rape to the flesh-and-bone variety?
Without recourse to a moral law above their own consciousness, without a
transcendent standard for ethical evaluation, all moral protest or
prescription must philosophically obliterate itself.

The domain of cyberspace does not in itself demand a descent into the
high-tech deceptions of technoshamanism. However, given the combined
influence of the bewitching nature of cyberspace and the occult ideas
thick in the cultural atmosphere, technoshamanism easily finds itself at
home in the keyboards of its devotees and beyond. Nevertheless, the soul
will find neither rest nor wisdom there. Jaron Lanier, a pioneer in
virtual reality technologies, sums it up: "The Internet exists for
people to connect with each other. But to connect with the mystery of
the universe, the Internet won't do. God doesn't have a Web site."^54^

As we have seen, whatever enticements it offers, technoshamanism suffers
from an internally inconsistent and ultimately unlivable world view. As
Scripture affirms, "Unless the Lord builds the house, its builders labor
in vain" (Ps. 127:1). Jesus also taught that those who live by His
teachings build their house on a rock that can withstand the
vicissitudes of life, while those who fail to obey build only on
shifting sand (Matt. 7:24-27).****Erecting a world view upon silicon is
no better than building it on sand.\
 \
 \
 **Douglas Groothuis**, Ph.D., is Assistant Professor of Philosophy of
Religion and Ethics at Denver Seminary and the author of five books.\
 \

**NOTES**

^1^Quoted in Steven Daly and Nathanial Wice, *alt.culture: an a-t-z
guide to the 90s — underground, online, and over-the-counter* (New York:
HarperPerennial, 1995), 130.\
 ^2^Steve Ditlea, "Leary's Final Trip, the Web, Realized His Multimedia
Vision," *New York Times*, 1 June 1996, on-line documentation.\
 ^3^Douglas Rushkoff, *Cyberia: Life in the Trenches of Hyperspace* (New
York: HarperCollins, 1994), 44-45, 49-50, 57, 61, 66, 132-33, 211, 229.\
 ^4^Ibid., 61.\
 ^5^Douglas Rushkoff, "Life at Tim's, after Tim," Timothy Leary's home
page.\
 ^6^See Mark Dery, *Escape Velocity* (New York: Grove Press, 1995), 22.\
 ^7^"Timothy Leary Transcript," Club Wired, *HotWired* (95-08-10),
on-line documentation.\
 ^8^Quoted in Dery, 28.\
 ^9^Rushkoff, *Cyberia*, 30.\
 ^10^See Dery, 22.\
 ^11^Bruce Sterling, preface to *Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology*,
ed. Bruce Sterling (New York: Ace, 1991), xiii; quoted in Dery, 25.\
 ^12^Dery, 22.\
 ^13^Quoted in Rushkoff, *Cyberia,* 58.\
 ^14^Ibid., 187.\
 ^15^Ibid.\
 ^16^Ibid.\
 ^17^Eric Davis, "Technopagans," *Wired,* July 1995, 176.\
 ^18^Timothy Leary and Eric Gullicsen, "High-Tech Paganism-Digital
Polytheism" (n.d.), Timothy Leary home page.\
 ^19^On the New Age movement, see Douglas Groothuis, *Unmasking the New
Age: Is There a New Religious Movement Trying to Transform Society?*
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1986), *Confronting the New Age*
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1988), and *Jesus in an Age of
Controversy* (Eugene, OR: Harvest House, 1996). \
 ^20^See Jeff Zaleski, "Cyberspirit," *Yoga Journal,* March/April 1996,
69.\
 ^21^For more on Teilhard de Chardin, see Tal Brooke, "Preparing for the
Cosmic Millennium and the Coming Global Church,"*Spiritual Counterfeits
Project Journal*19, nos. 2-3 (1995): 4-17.\
 ^22^This is argued in a favorable article by John R. Mabry, "Cyberspace
and the Dream of Teilhard de Chardin," *Creation Spirituality,* Summer
1994, 25.\
 ^23^Quoted in Spencer Reiss, "Is He the Net's Thomas Jefferson? John
Perry Barlow on Tour," *Yahoo! Internet Life,* July-August 1996, 113.\
 ^24^David Jay Brown and Rebecca McClen Novick, "Forging the Possible
Human with Jean Houston," *Voices from the Edge*, ed. David Jay Brown
and Rebecca McClen Novick (Freedom, CA: The Freedom Press, 1995), 246.\
 ^25^For more on shamanism, see Groothuis, *Unmasking*, 137; and
Groothuis, *Jesus*, 242-43.\
 ^26^Davis, 174.\
 ^27^Ibid., 128.\
 ^28^Ibid.\
 ^29^Ibid.\
 ^30^Ibid.\
 ^31^Ibid., 131.\
 ^32^Indra's net and its relationship to claims in New Age scientific
thought is analyzed in Groothuis, *Unmasking*, 98-109.\
 ^33^Davis, 180.\
 ^34^Ibid., 178.\
 ^35^Ibid.\
 ^36^Ibid.\
 ^37^On this theme, see Douglas Groothuis, *Christianity That Counts:
Being a Christian in a Non-Christian World* (Grand Rapids: Baker Books,
1994), 102-5.\
 ^38^Michael Heim, *The Metaphysics of Virtual Reality* (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1994), 85.\
 ^39^Abraham Heschel, *Man Is Not Alone: A Philosophy of Religion* (New
York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1951), 33-34.\
 ^40^See Rousas John Rushdoony, "Power from Below," *The Journal of
Christian Reconstruction*1, 2 (Winter 1974): 7-10.\
 ^41^See Deuteronomy 18:10-12.\
 ^42^"The Counterfeit Infinity" is a chapter title from Os Guinness,
*The Dust of Death: The Sixties Counterculture and How It Changed
America Forever*(Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, 1994), 235-74. \
 ^43^On the dangers of occult involvement, see Groothuis, *Confronting
the New Age,* 76-83.\
 ^44^Rushkoff, *Cyberia*, 148-49.\
 ^45^See Winfried Corduan, *Reasonable Faith*(Nashville, TN: Broadman,
Holman, 1993), 60-61.\
 ^46^See R. C. Sproul, *Not a Chance: The Myth of Chance in Modern
Science and Cosmology*(Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1994), 92-93, and
Guinness, 238.\
 ^47^Tal Brooke, "Cyberspace: Storming Digital Heaven," *SCP
Journal*19:4-20:1 (1995): 16.\
 ^48^Rushkoff, *Cyberia*, 205.\
 ^49^Ibid.\
 ^50^Ibid., 144.\
 ^51^Ibid., 198.\
 ^52^Ibid., ix.\
 ^53^See Francis A. Schaeffer, *The God Who Is There: Speaking Historic
Christianity into the Twentieth Century* (Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 1976), 56-62.\
 ^54^Quoted in Zaleski, 72.
