---
author: admin
date: '2004-11-06 20:03:31'
layout: post
slug: movies-and-books
status: publish
title: Movies and Books
wordpress_id: '281'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I went and saw **The Incredibles** yesterday with the test organization
that I work within. I liked the movie quite a bit but I generally enjoy
Pixar's work. I wouldn't say it was exceptional but it is as enjoyable
as, say, **Finding Nemo** was for me.[![Cover
image](http://images.darkhorse.com/covers/med/45/45076.jpg)](http://www.darkhorse.com/profile/profile.php?sku=45-076)
On the way home, I got my hair cut and stopped by my friend's comic book
store in the U District, **The Dreaming**. While there, I picked up the
second issue of **We3**, the latest issue of **Lenore** for R, and,
randomly, I bought **Iron Empires Volume 1: Faith Conquers**. I'd missed
this when it came out a decade ago but it seems very reminiscent of both
the game**Warhammer 40,000** in some ways and some of the non-Mobius
French comics that I like. In any case, I read through it last night and
found it fairly enjoyable as far as militaristic, warrior-priest, power
armor science fiction goes. Apparantly, there are game supplments as
well for it and it would seem to lend itself to it. Go to
[http://www.theironempires.com](http://www.theironempires.com) for more
information. Madeline came over in the evening to spend the night. We
played with my Xbox for a while as I tried to figure out **Fable** and
then I tucked her into bed. This morning, we watched the original **Star
Wars** movie, which I'm not sure she'd ever seen. She always tells me
that she doesn't like Star Wars but she seemed to like this well enough.
I have a feeling that someone made her watch **The Phantom Menace** and
wouldn't that be a horrible first exposure to Star Wars? She went home
this afternoon to go see **The Incredibles** with a friend of hers.
Third Place Books, not far from my place, is having a 40% off sale on
used books this weekend. Of course, I realized this after I bought about
$80 worth of books there yesterday and the day before. Someone involved
in Vajrayana with similar interests to mine seems to have sold their
library. There were a lot of books, with publishing dates over the last
15 years, on Deity Yoga, Dzogchen, Mahamudra, Kagyu and Nyingma
practices, and Buddhist ethics. Most of the Dzogchen books were ones
that I already owned but there were a few that I'd never known about,
from a particular teacher, so I hadn't bought them. A few were ones that
I'd been trying to find or had been meaning to buy but I try to keep
book purchases within reason month to month with my varied interests.
Anyway, it translated to me buying a horde of books. I just wish I'd
known about the sale because I bet many of these wouldn't have sold
before now and I'd have saved about $25 or more. Ah well. I'm reading
the new Iain M. Banks novel, **[The
Algebraist](http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/1841491551/)**,
right now. I started this earlier today and it's pretty good. Not a
"Culture" book but still very Iain Banks. Baroque Galactic Science
Fiction. I also received my copy of Thorn Coyle's **[Evolutionary
Witchcraft](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1585423475/)**
a week ago and I'm planning on starting that this weekend as well.
Looking through it, it seems likely to be a pretty decent book and not
the usual pap. It's shaping up to be a fairly quiet weekend overall.
From what I can tell, there isn't a lot going on so I haven't been
inclined to go out. I am continuing some of the design work and thinking
on my next tattoo. I'll post more when I've made up my mind on a few
things.
