---
author: admin
date: '2004-12-25 20:11:46'
layout: post
slug: christmas
status: publish
title: Christmas
wordpress_id: '338'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Christmas Day and all of the joys associated with it!

R and I got up this morning, got ready and then headed straight over to
my grandparents for Christmas morning, which I traditionally do with
these fine, Christian, folk. My grandparents, my daughter and my ex-wife
were all over there, the latter two having spent the night. Did I
mention before that my ex-wife, Chris, is always around my grandparents'
place? They watch Madeline a lot of the time and Chris helps my
grandmother out a bit so they've got some sort of weird symbiotic thing
going. Having my first wife and my current wife both there was
different, to say the least.

This is the first time that R has gone there as she normally is in the
Bay Area with her family but couldn't go this year. We did the normal
gift exchange and then went and did the Christmas Brunch at the dining
room of their retirement community. The food there is generally better
than you'd expect and we had a good time. Eventually, after the brunch
and chatting for a while, we took our leave.

After a quick stop by the only open Starbucks in the area, we headed
over to Rubylou's place for her casual Christmas rescue mission. Rubylou
has an open house every Christmas afternoon and evening for any strays,
lonely Jews, and people needing to recover from family gatherings. There
was a pretty good spread of food there and I got to spend some time
talking to Rubylou, her SO, Sean the Apple Guy, and playing with Lulu
the Kitty and Livy the baby. Strange as this may seem to some people,
little babies like me almost as much as cats do and I played with Livy
on and off the whole time that I was there. She's a fun kid.

We just got home a short while ago and I'm ready to unwind a bit. Today
was the first day of rain all week and it turns out the my emergency
seal on the roof does nothing so the drip was back this morning and
afternoon. Luckily, the rain seems to have stopped so I can quit being
annoyed by it for now. This had better be fixed on Tuesday though.

I think I'll go read my Grimwood novel now.

**Listening To:** Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds - Brother, My Cup is Empty
