---
author: admin
date: '2004-11-29 22:59:05'
layout: post
slug: movies-and-magic
status: publish
title: Movies and Magic
wordpress_id: '299'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

The last week with the long weekend has been the weekend of many movies.
Along with Netflix movies, R and I rented a couple and then I bought a
few.

Last night, we watched **Dawn of the Dead**, which was a bit of a dog.
Now, I like a bad zombie movie as much as the next guy but while parts
of it were engaging, the movie as a whole was utterly predictable. I was
hoping for a bit better but I expected it to be as such. We also watched
**Envy** with Ben Stiller and Jack Black (plus Christoper "I'm fuckin'
creepy" Walken). That one was a bit better and typical Stiller and Black
type shenanigans. Again, not a deep movie but I was simply hoping for
funny. Jack Black always makes me laugh.

Tonight, we watched **The Unforgiven**, which I bought yesterday (along
with **The Outlaw Josey Wales** and **Pale Rider**). As you can imagine,
I'm a bit of a Clint Eastwood Western fan. I hadn't seen it in years and
I still loved the moodiness and just general desperation of the terribly
flawed characters. I can't think of a simple "pure" character in the
whole movie unless it is the children. Unlike the old Westerns, everyone
in this movie is messed up. As Clint says "We've all got it coming."

Watching him also reminded me that I need to pick up the rest of the
**Dark Tower** books again soon. Roland calls. Maybe over the holidays.

Tonight, I'm reading **A Year in Linear City**, a novella by Paul Di
Filippo, in the collection, **Cities**. **The Tain** by China Mieville
is in it as well, which is actually why I got it. As it turns out, all
of the authors that contributed to it are ones that I like.

I've also been working through Stephenson's **The Confusion** and have
gotten far enough that I understand the basis of the name (and I'm not
meaning that as a joke). Stephenson continues to give me laugh-out-loud
moments when I read it though some of it seems to fall flat when I try
to explain why it is so funny to the missus.

I am also reading some of Mark Stavish's essays, including one on
compassion and the Western Esoteric Tradition. He draws comparisons with
the Tantric tradition and the Bodhisattvas for contrast. Mark and I have
been corresponding a bit in the last few days and exchanging some
thoughts on the Western Estoteric Tradition. Inevitably, my involvement
with Tantric Buddhism comes up in the conversation and the needs that it
fulfils that I don't get in "my own" native tradition. He has some
interesting thoughts and insights here and seems pretty well informed.
We've had a discussion relating the Inner Heat yoga from Naropa to some
of Mark's ideas around the Middle Pillar ritual. Interesting.

I also updated the stylesheet on [his
website](http://www.hermetic.com/stavish/) on the [Hermetic
Library](http://www.hermetic.com/) as the old one was just making me
wince. It seemed nice six or seven years ago when I wrote it.
