---
author: admin
date: '2004-09-30 15:51:51'
layout: post
slug: when-it-rains
status: publish
title: When it rains...
wordpress_id: '247'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Alright, that's enough...

I took my OTHER cat of many years, Pollux, my tom, to the vet today
because he's gone downright gaunt in the last six months. They weighed
him and he weighs just a little over six pounds and he was a nine or ten
pound cat before. He's not so thin he's going to die but they are doing
blood and urine work to see if he might have thyroid problems or
diabetes or kidney issues.

While squeezing his organs from outside, the vet (and several of his
fellows) noticed a mass that doesn't belong. Given Pollux's alert state
and lack of visible illness (outside of weight loss) or behavior
changes, the best guess is a lymph node gone cancerous or his spleen. I
had them do x-rays and, while they confirm the mass, they don't show
much else about it. Since we're leaving town on Monday for two and a
half weeks for Europe, this, like the x-rays for Freya, will have to
wait until we return. I have two options: they can open him up and take
a look or they can do an ultrasound and probably get a sample of the
mass for tests with the help of the ultrasound for aim... Needless to
say, I'm going to choose the latter.

So, I have one cat with breast cancer, which may or may not be operable,
one cat with some sort of tumor or other cancer, and then Nova, the
seemingly healthy three year old that we just took on. The outlook seems
a bit grim for my older kitties.
