---
author: admin
date: '2004-08-11 23:45:42'
layout: post
slug: the-last-few-days
status: publish
title: The Last Few Days
wordpress_id: '200'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

It's been a busy few days and I haven't written much... My daughter came
over last weekend and spent the night. We hung out a bit and watched
**Spy Kids 2** together (which sucked). I prefer the first one, which I
had quite enjoyed when it came out. Ah well, I heard the third one is
even worse. Saturday night, R and I celebrated Lamas with our Wiccan HPS
and had a little meeting. That was very nice as she is more on the
"earthy" end of things as compared to my own cabalistic-renaissance take
on Western spiritual practice. We sat in the backyard around the
cauldron, did a short rite and libation and generally enjoyed the night.
Sunday was a gathering at Sarastro's place to thank those of us that
helped him move. The food was good and it was nice to see him but there
wasn't a lot to note here beyond that... This week has been a difficult
work week for reasons that I won't go into. Suffice it to say that
sometimes being in management isn't just about having fun and being in
charge of things. This evening, R and I went shopping for a suit for me
to wear at our wedding in October. We decided a while ago that she would
get a nice wedding-type dress and I would get a suite to wear. We went
down to Bell Squares and went to a few places. Eventually, we went to
the Bon and found a black suite jacket and matching pants there. Given
sales and other discounts, I managed to get them for about 60% of what
they listed for so I was quite happy. I picked up an off-white dress
shirt (which, I am told, matches her dress color pretty well) and a dark
blue tie to go with it. I'll have to get some dress shoes later but it
was good to get that out of the way. The trick was to find a suit that
I'd want to wear after the wedding as well. I'm not exactly a suit guy
(hell, I can't even tie a tie), which won't surprise anyone that knows
me. I'm Mr. Cargo Pants-with-witty-t-shirt most of the time, which is
funny given that I'm some professional class manager but, hey, fuck it,
I don't like super expensive prissy clothes really. That being said, we
did look at Armani suits at Nordstrom's and if I could afford to dress
in a $1,700 Armani suit every day, I would. Those were nice... ![Thangka
Image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/Samantabadra_mandala_big.jpg)I
surprised R with a new piece of art this evening. When I was in New
York, I stopped in Woodstock at Dharmawar
([http://www.dharmaware.com](http://www.dharmaware.com)) with my friends
and looked at the nice thangkas that they had there. Thangkas are
Tibetan Buddhist meditation art, usually used to show the imagery of
deities for meditative practices. They are also quite beautiful if
you're willing to pay the big bucks to get a really fine one or willing
to sherpa one on your back from Nepal yourself (which makes it a lot
cheaper but more troublesome...). I saw a particularly nice
Samantabhadra Yab-Yum Thangka while I was there, which was not cheap at
all. In any case, when I got home, I showed the image of it on the
website to R, along with a few others. She instantly called it out from
all of them, which was interesting since it was my favorite from the
bunch as well. We discussed getting it for placement in our living room
as it is beautiful and we need more beautiful things in our house. It
was expensive though so we didn't agree to get it. On my own, I then
contacted the shop and paid for it out of some of my savings money (for
the good cause of our home) and had it shipped. It arrived today and I
brought it into the house when we got home this evening and surprised R
with it... As you can see to the right, it really is quite nice. The
painting itself is 18" by 24" and it is surrounded by a silk brocade. I
wish we could afford to have more things about this as it is always nice
to be surrounded by beautiful, spiritual images.
