---
author: admin
date: '2004-05-20 21:05:00'
layout: post
slug: vampires-among-us
status: publish
title: Vampires Among Us!!!
wordpress_id: '115'
categories:
- Society
---
<P><A href="http://www.kptv.com/global/story.asp?s=1877868&amp;ClientType=Printable">http://www.kptv.com/global/story.asp?s=1877868&amp;ClientType=Printable</A></P>
<P><B>Interview with a vampire</B><P>05-18-04</P><P>PORTLAND --&nbsp;You've seen them in scary movies, comic books and maybe even in your nightmares, but have you ever seen a vampire in real life?</P><P>You probably have if you live in Portland. </P><P>"Generally a vampire is anything that feeds off the energy of others," says 19-year old art student and vampire, Raven.</P><P>She says only a couple of her friends know she is a vampire.&nbsp; Her family, even her fiance are in the dark.</P><P>"My mom's Catholic and she'd have a coronary," Raven said. </P><P>Raven claims she's a psyonic, or psychic vampire. </P><P>"Generally, most people if they have a strong emotion&nbsp;I can feel it from them," she says. "And that tends to be a pain."</P><P>Raven says it's both a burden and blessing.&nbsp; She discovered her abilities&nbsp;about three years ago during her "awakening," something every vampire goes through. </P><P>"It's just kind of a moment of acceptance," Raven says.</P><P>Speaking of acceptance, Raven says there are several rumors about vampires that just aren't&nbsp;necessarily true.&nbsp; </P><P>Raven says she loves garlic, and is not bothered by holy water or crosses.</P><P>"I used to be a Christian, crosses don't bother me," she says. "There are Christian vampires.&nbsp;I can walk into a church and it doesn't burn that bad."</P><P>What about&nbsp;drinking blood?</P><P>"I can feed off blood and it does give me a bit of a rush, and it does give energy," Raven explains. "But&nbsp;I don't really need it."</P><P>One local vampire enthusiast says she doesn't buy it.&nbsp; For Meredith Gilbert, its all about the fantasy.</P><P>"No. I don't believe in supernatural vampires," says Gilbert.</P><P>Gilbert has done enough research to know.&nbsp; She saw her first vampire movie at ten years old and has been "sucked" in ever since. </P><P>"I like the stories where people actually want to be a vampire," she says.</P><P>Gilbert&nbsp;reads every vampire novel and comic book she can get her hands on.&nbsp; She exchanges vampire-speak on-line. But she calls a&nbsp;"real vampire" like Raven&nbsp;fiction. </P><P>"If that's what she wants to believe, it doesn't hurt me any....so....she can believe what she wants," says Gilbert.</P><P>Raven wants to put Portlanders at ease. </P><P>She promises she is not going to fly across the street, or latch onto your neck. She says she's just a minority in this great big world, looking for a little understanding.</P><P>"Vampires have to get along in society," Raven says.&nbsp;"They have work, maintain friends, family school everything."</P><P>Raven says there are others like her in Portland, and she says she also has vampire friend in Vancouver.</P>
