---
author: admin
date: '2004-12-17 22:25:37'
layout: post
slug: fake-grant-morrison-interview
status: publish
title: Fake Grant Morrison Interview
wordpress_id: '325'
categories:
- Science Fiction
---
<p>Fake Grant Morrison Interview</p><p>This is amusing as all hell. I wish they'd do Warren Ellis.</p>
<p><a href="http://www.comixexperience.com/fbr0503.htm">http://www.comixexperience.com/fbr0503.htm</a></p>
<p>This is just an excerpt:</p><blockquote><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>As do I.&nbsp; As do I.&nbsp; I must say, I’m very curious as to your plans for the future in comics.&nbsp; Do you have more magical acts in the works?</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>Of course.&nbsp; I’m actually making plans for my grandest scheme yet.</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>What can you tell us about it?</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>Ahem.&nbsp; Well.&nbsp; My plan is to turn the DC Universe into a sentient being.</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>Errrr…</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>You heard me correctly.</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>I understand each of the individual words, but I’m not sure what they mean next to each other.</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>It’s hard to explain…</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>Because of the complexity?</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>Because I’m coming onto the Acid and the hash twinkies.&nbsp; But I’ll give it a shot.</p><p>You see, Paul, I think of the DC Universe as fulfilling many of the requirements of a living thing.&nbsp; It grows, it changes over time, it reacts to its environment.&nbsp; In fact, considering that the creations in the DC Universe have outlived many of their creators, you could say that the DC Universe is more alive than we are, something that will continue to exist long after you and I are dead.</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>All right.</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>Now, although it is alive, it isn’t what we would call conscious.&nbsp; It growth and its actions are essentially reactive, like a plant, or an oyster, or John Byrne.</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>I see.</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>Unlike the oyster or John Byrne, this isn’t because the DC Universe lacks sufficient complexity.&nbsp; Its level of complexity, as you might expect after sixty years of monthly development and refinement, is staggering.</p><p>What I plan to do is, much in the same way a crucial lightning bolt hit the primordial soup and started the chain reaction which created life as we know it, write a comic series that will bring the DC Universe to consciousness.&nbsp; To wake up an entity that is largely dormant. My belief is that this is very similar to the way our universe was created.&nbsp; We existed largely as a fiction that became sufficiently complex, and then a final story gave us our independence and brought us to consciousness.</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>Absolutely fascinating.</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>Thank you. This is the point where somebody’s supposed to jump up and yell “He’s absolutely mad!” and then a bunch of villagers chase me with burning torches to an abandoned windmill.</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>Well, it’s still a little early for that, Grant.&nbsp; Tell me, after you manage to turn the DC Universe into an individually cognizant being, what then?</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>What then?</p><p><b>Paul Gravett:</b></p><p>Yes.&nbsp; What do you plan to do with an living comic book universe</p><p><b>Grant Morrison:</b></p><p>I plan to have sex with it.</p></blockquote>
