---
author: admin
date: '2004-05-29 20:54:00'
layout: post
slug: is-there-more-of-this-lurking-out-there
status: publish
title: Is there more of this lurking out there?
wordpress_id: '126'
categories:
- Society
---

How much of this are we going to eventually hear about? Gang-rape in
Cuba or something? How many of our soldiers are out of control with
people that they think deserve it?

I have friends in the military but I still have to wonder what the hell
is going on.

[http://www.lex18.com/Global/story.asp?S=1891343&amp;nav=EQlpNN9R](http://www.lex18.com/Global/story.asp?S=1891343&amp;nav=EQlpNN9R)

## **Former Soldier Disputes Army Denials That He Was Beaten During
Training Exercises In Cuba**

A Georgetown resident and former Kentucky National Guardsman is angry
that the military is denying his claims that he suffered brain injury
while being severely beaten by U.S. soldiers during a training exercise
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in January 2003.

In a story with international implications first broken by LEX 18's
Leigh Searcy on Monday, Sean Baker says that while serving as a member
of the 438th Military Police company in Guantanamo Bay during Operation
Iraqi Freedom, he was ordered to pose as the enemy for a training
exercise. Baker said he received a severe brain injury because of the
subsequent beating he received.

Baker claims that he was ordered to put on one of the orange jump suits
worn by the detainees. "At first I was reluctant, but he said 'you'll be
fine...put this on.' And I did," said Baker.

"I was on duty as an MP in an internal camp (at Guantanamo Bay) where
the detainees were housed," said Baker.

Baker says an officer in charge issued the order because he wanted the
training to be as real as possible. Baker says what took place next
happened at the hands of four U.S. soldiers - soldiers he believes
didn't know he was one of them - has changed his life forever.

"They grabbed my arms, my legs, twisted me up and unfortunately one of
the individuals got up on my back from behind and put pressure down on
me while I was face down," said Baker. "Then he - the same individual -
reached around and began to choke me and press my head down against the
steel floor. After several seconds, 20 to 30 seconds, it seemed like an
eternity because I couldn't breath. When I couldn't breath, I began to
panic and I gave the code word I was supposed to give to stop the
exercise, which was 'red.'"

But, Baker says, the beating didn't stop. "That individual slammed my
head against the floor and continued to choke me," he said. "Somehow I
got enough air, I muttered out, 'I'm a U.S. soldier, I'm a U.S.
soldier.'"

Baker says it wasn't until one of the soldiers noticed what Baker was
wearing did the exercise stop. "He saw that I had BDU's and boots on."

Nearly 15 months after that day, and countless medical treatments at
Walter Reed Hospital, Baker is now medically retired from the military,
but still suffers.

On Wednesday, the U.S.military, while acknowledging an injury to Baker
took place during the exercise, is disputing some of Baker's claims,
saying he left for "unrelated reasons." Baker said he already feels
betrayed about what happened to him, and tells LEX 18's Searcy that he's
not at all surprised by the Army's response to his "going public" with
his story.

"As a soldier, you almost expect that. Denial," said Baker.

Speaking from his Scott County home Wednesday morning, Baker once again
reiterated his claims, and is angry that the Army won't admit what
happened.

"How can they say I was released from there for other reasons?" said
Baker. "If there are other reasons, please bring forth the evidence. I"d
like to see it."

Baker says he has nothing to hide, and he plans to request the
military's information. Due to privacy laws, an Army spokeswoman says
she can't release any of Baker's medical history. She will only say he
was not discharged for disciplinary reasons.

Baker said, "I wish they would bring forth something to substantiate
their claims that I was released for 'unrelated reasons' because the
documents I have from the Medical Evaluation Board clearly state the
traumatic brain injury was due to me role playing as a detainee, an
uncooperative detainee."

Baker's certificate of discharge from active duty shows the 37-year-old
had a character of service that was "honorable" It shows he retired due
to temporary disability - the brain injury Baker claims is the direct
result of posing as a prisoner and being beaten at the hands of U.S.
soldiers.

"The seizure disorder was the prominent injury that stopped me from
being a soldier," said Baker, who takes several medications to control
the seizures but still suffers them frequently. "It all stems from the
training incident. The seizures are the result of the brain injury.

"All I wanted to be is a soldier. And when they denied me of that and
sent me home...I want to hold them accountable."

Baker was a member of the Kentucky National Guard from 1989 to 1997.
During that time, he served in the Gulf War. In the late 90's, he got
out of the Guard, but re-enlisted after September 11th.

"I feel like I've been betrayed by my own troops because I would never
have done to any detainee what had been transpired in my life what
happened to me," said Baker. "I don't want this to happen to anyone
else, what I'm living with daily."
