---
author: admin
date: '2004-10-07 04:49:56'
layout: post
slug: venice-first-day
status: publish
title: Venice - First Day
wordpress_id: '253'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

We arrived in Venice on the train around 11:00 am. It's hard to describe
Venice, even having read about it quite a bit. It really is out of the
middle of what seems to be a giant lake or small sea. The train goes on
the kind of causeway that one thinks of seeing with pictures of Key
West. You're literally going on a little road and train track with water
on either side and nothing else. When it arrives at the edge of the city
where the station is, you exist out the front doors and the canals and
the bridges are right there. Boats are going by, people are wandering on
the walkways next to the canals and the whole thing looks both immensely
old but also very impressive. The whole place is also a maze. The only
place that I've been to that seemed very similar was wandering around
the side streets in Santorini's main city when we were there. Lots of
dark alleyways between buildings with hordes of people going back and
forth. We're here just after the main tourist season but R tells me that
only 70,000 people live here year round. There are an amazing amount of
tourists here. R and I attempted to go to the hotel we had picked out,
which was only one star but had rooms facing out onto the canal. It was
full but just around the corner we found a fairly nice two star hotel
that we've been pretty happy with. Clean and nice room, our own shower
and bathroom, etc. After getting settled in, we wandered around a bit,
got a coffee, and eventually decided to head over to the Palazo Grassi,
where they are hosting a large Dali exhibit, with paintings and such
from around the world. We spent a couple of hours in there. They had
most of his well known work (though not my favorite image of his
Christ), a surrealist film he did, notes, sketches, books and other
materials. I think we were there for about 2 1/2 hours all told. We
picked up a few cards, including a Surrealist one for my boss, and
called it a day. On the way back, we stopped at a nice ristorante and
had beef stew, local bread, red wine and then a nice dessert. We're
still feeling a bit of jet lag so we wound up having a coffee after that
and then just going back to the hotel to read for a while. We turned in
early. I'm running low on Internet time here at the cafe now so I'll
write about our second day in Venice (today) later on...
