---
author: admin
date: '2004-07-11 01:22:15'
layout: post
slug: comics-books-and-events-of-the-day
status: publish
title: Comics, Books and Events of the Day
wordpress_id: '170'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I'm getting a little reading in this weekend. On Friday, I started and
finished **[Down and Out in the Magic
Kingdom](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0765304368/)** by
Cory Doctorow. I hadn't actually gotten around to reading more than the
first chapter before but it is a short work and I read it cover to cover
in a few hours. I read his**Eastern Standard Tribe** from a reviewer's
copy before it came out, strangely enough.

Later last night, I started reading Charles Stross' **[The Atrocity
Archives](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1930846258/)**,
which is his Cthulhu meets Computer Geeks meets Spry Thrillers book. I'm
only about 50 pages into that though. I read **Singularity Sky** a month
or two ago and I've been waiting for my copy of **[Iron
Sunrise](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0441011594/)**
(its sequel) to arrive. I should have just bought it at the U Bookstore
today. I made the mistake of ordering it from Amazon the day it was
released (it said "usually ships in 24 hours"), on Wednesday, and I'm
still waiting for it to ship. The fucks. Never trust [Jim
Bezos](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&ie=UTF-8&q=Jim+Bezos&btnG=Google+Search)
to ship you anything on time. This happened the last time I pre-ordered
something as well. All of my friends had it and were reading it while I
was sitting around waiting for my book...

In any case, Doctorow and Stross are both of a breed: computer geeks who
have turned into science fiction writers. There's probably a few more
out there that I'm not thinking of (oh, yeah, Ken Schroeder). It's
interesting to read fiction loaded with geek in-jokes, slashdot-type
references, and technical terminology that is actually correct or mostly
so. We'll see how well it dates in 20 years though. Neither goes
completely overboard with it in my opinion but I'm definitely the target
demographic.

* * * * *

Today was a pretty quiet day. I slept in until 10:00 or so after staying
up late. R and I were supposed to go to a BBQ at my friend Sarastro's
place as he was picking up our mutual friend, Danae, who is in the area
from Eugene, OR. Unfortunately, due to car troubles and lack of easy
communication, this wound up not happening. R and I puttered around the
house a bit in the early afternoon and then went out. We drove down to
the University District and visited the comic shop of my friend, Aaron,
**The Dreaming**. While there, I picked up a copy of **[The Book of
Eibon](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1568821298/)**, which is
Cthulhu mythos related stories and materials largely done by Clark
Ashton Smith or inspired by his work. Along with the copy of **[Nameless
Cults](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1568821301/)** by
Robert E. Howard that R gifted me with the other year, this brings some
of my more Cthulhu-related materials to completion.

A quick stop by Thai Tom's (best Thai food in Seattle and worth the
wait!) and Tully's armed us with food and coffee to continue our big
city adventures.

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/highbury-working-web.jpg)I'd
been looking for some of Alan Moore's CD projects but Aaron has not had
much luck getting them for me. I have recalled, off and on, that the
comic store in Wallingford had one of them last year but figured that
they were long gone as this stuff is largely out of print now. Since we
were nearby, I persuaded R to go over there and we arrived 15 minutes
before closing. Lo and behold, they had it still! So, I picked up a copy
of **[The Highbury Working: Beat
Seance](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/B000056UVI/)** by
Alan Moore and Tim Perkins. This is a recording of a
ritual/musical/spoken word performance by Alan Moore accompanied by
images and, I believe, a dancer. This was done as part of a series of
magical and ritual performances in London that Moore had planned. My
understanding, based on interviews, is that he plans on continuing to do
more of this sort of work, rather than the comics work that has earned
him his fame up until the current point.

Following the surge of shopping, R and I went over to Ballard in search
of recreation and sugary confections. Arriving in the mid-evening, we
found most things closed. We did discover that this Saturday is the
Artwalk in Ballard and took this as an opportunity to walk the streets
for a while, ducking into and out of places and generally having a nice
time wandering around. Looking for movie options and finding them
lacking, we picked up **The Lost Skeleton of Cadavra** and **Secret
Window** to watch at a rental place. We watched the latter this evening,
which I must report as disappointing and predictable fare, as nice as it
is to watch Johnny Depp act. I would have preferred to have watched
**Pirates of the Caribbean** again instead.

Now that the hour has grown late, I'm just doing this record of the days
events before, probably, retiring before it starts to get light outside.
Too much coffee, on supposes.
