---
author: admin
date: '2004-08-07 18:55:47'
layout: post
slug: discordian-history
status: publish
title: Discordian History
wordpress_id: '199'
categories:
- Esoteric
---

[http://www.reason.com/0408/cr.bd.historia.shtml](http://www.reason.com/0408/cr.bd.historia.shtml)
**Historia Discordia** by Brian Doherty *Reason, August/September 2004*
Kerry Thornley lived and died in obscurity. But while few people
noticed, he invented one of the 20th century’s more influential
religions, helped launch ’60s-style sex-and-nature neopaganism, and was
a major force behind the first modern libertarian ’zine. He was also, to
hear him tell it, part of the conspiracy to murder JFK, and thus
escalate the Vietnam War -- a conspiracy so secret even Thornley didn’t
know about it at the time. Thornley was one of America’s most
fascinating unknowns. It is fitting, given the underground nature of his
claims to fame, that his first biography, The Prankster and the
Conspiracy: The Story of Kerry Thornley and How He Met Oswald and
Inspired the Counterculture, by Adam Gorightly, is published in the
quasi-clandestine form of a print-on-demand book from Paraview Press.
Thornley helped his high school buddy Greg Hill invent the comedic
religion of Discordianism in dull suburban Southern California in the
late 1950s. It was dedicated to the worship of Eris, the Greek goddess
of Chaos. Its flavor can be gleaned from this bit of powerful magick,
the Turkey Curse, from its holy book, the Principia Discordia:
"Face...towards the direction of the negative aneristic vibration that
you wish to neutralize. Begin waving your arms in any elaborate manner
and make motions with your hands as though you were Mandrake feeling up
a sexy giantess. Chant, loudly and clearly: GOBBLE, GOBBLE, GOBBLE,
GOBBLE, GOBBLE! The results will be instantly apparent." Thornley joined
the Marines in 1959, where one of his buddies at the El Toro Marine Base
was Lee Harvey Oswald, an openly communist "outfit eight ball" known to
his fellow grunts as "Oswaldskovitch." Thornley began writing a novel
based on his disillusioning experience in the Marines. After hearing
that ol’ Oswaldskovitch really meant it with that commie stuff when he
defected to the Soviet Union, Thornley transformed the book, called The
Idle Warriors, into a roman à clef about Oswald -- making Thornley the
only person to write a book about Lee Oswald before that fall day in
Dallas. Thornley was living in New Orleans when John F. Kennedy was
killed, hanging out, according to his own recollections (which some
friends suspect Thornley invented) with a curious cast of characters.
Among them were some unfortunates caught in New Orleans District
Attorney Jim Garrison’s feckless investigation into the JFK
assassination. What is definitely not Thornley’s imagination, though, is
that he was dragged into the "Who Killed Kennedy?" melodrama, testifying
before the Warren Commission and targeted by Garrison, who thought
Thornley might have been part of the conspiracy as a "second Oswald."
The two men allegedly looked quite similar, and there was a weird series
of coincidences linking them. In the mid-’60s Thornley headed back west
and became a major writer for the first modern libertarian ’zine, The
Innovator. In those years he also became an advocate of the early SoCal
free love cult Kerista, which neopagan historian Margot Adler credits,
says Gorightly, as "the true beginnings of the neopagan movement in
contemporary culture." Through the ’70s and the ’80s the "order"
reflected in his insanely elaborated conspiracy theories won Thornley’s
heart away from the chaos of Eris, and also lost him most of his old
friends. No one wants to hang with someone who is sure you are part of a
baroque conspiracy against him. Thornley had decided that Garrison was
right after all, that he was a CIA mind-control slave, that a mysterious
pal in New Orleans was E. Howard Hunt, and finally that he had been a
Manchurian candidate from birth, with his parents Nazi spies. He spent
the last years of his life (he died in 1998) occasionally washing dishes
and living in storm drains, and hanging out as a local eccentric in
Atlanta’s Little Five Points neighborhood. A sad fate for someone
dedicated to spreading forces of upheaval and chaos: from his
Discordianism to his advocating a libertarian diaspora populating
stateless floating cities in The Innovator, to his inspiration of Robert
Anton Wilson and Robert Shea’s classic trilogy, Illuminatus!, to all the
aftershocks spreading from that earthquake of a novel. But Thornley
still got in his prankish fun, for example putting up flyers urging
people to "Boycott the illegal weapons amnesty program: Don’t bring your
illegal weapons to the Super Bowl in exchange for tickets!" when the
game was held in Atlanta in 1994. A strange and troublesome man, that
Thornley, serving Eris to the end, and proof that, while you don’t have
to be crazy to warp American culture, it helps.
