---
author: admin
date: '2004-05-22 01:46:00'
layout: post
slug: transcript-of-bruce-sterling-at-microsoft-corporation
status: publish
title: Transcript of Bruce Sterling at Microsoft Corporation
wordpress_id: '117'
categories:
- Notable People
- Science Fiction
---

Bruce Sterling, one of my favorites writers and a personal god, was at
Microsoft today ranting/lecturing. It was fun and I just spent two hours
transcribing the entire f'ing thing with all of the play-pause that is
involved. If you don't like my spelling or something, go die now. I
removed the mental spacing "uhms" and "ands" from his speech. If it
isn't exact enough, sue me. Thanks! - Al

### Transcript of Bruce Sterling Lecture/Rant of the Moment in support
of *The Zenith Angle* Book Tour.

### Microsoft Campus, 1:30 PM, May 21, 2004![Bruce
Sterling](http://www.arcanology.com/images/bsterling-ms.jpg)

Hi. Well, it's nice to be back with you weird crungie (?) characters
once again. Yeah, you know this book has a lot to say to people in your
industry. It got blurbed...I almost said it got "blogged"...but it got
blurbed by Howard Schmidt, your former chief security officer and Bill
Gates is a minor character in the book. At one point, he offers my hero
a job. And it is a book about computer security among other things. It's
basically about a...it's a Mr. Smith goes to Washington story about a
techie that decides to join federal service after 9/11 because his
family has a long history of technical service to the United States
government and complications ensue. It's got a villain and a
superweapon. It's a technothriller and technothrillers kind of require
villains and superweapons because otherwise there is no reason to keep
turning pages. But although it is a great superweapon and I stole it
from the best guys in the business, I really put some intellectual
effort into it and I thought it was a nifty keen kind of weapon o' mass
destruction style nifty technothriller superweapon, absolutely nobody is
interested in it. Nobody is patting me on the head about my ingenious
superweapon, the labor of love that I invested in this because nobody
believes in WMD anymore, frankly. It is just a sci-fi vaporware notion.
What people are interested in is the book's take on Federal computer
security and it is a mess. I think anybody who's got e-mail has to know
that Federal computer security is a mess but I never expected in my life
to see it as bad as it is now. It's just a debacle and it didn't help
that the capo of cyber security for the Bush Administration was Richard
Clark but he was. And the guy blew up like thermite right of the
congress and every camera in the business and it's just a crying shame.
So I have some rather harsh things to say about the state of law and
order in cyberspace in this book. People ask me about it. Is it really
this bad and the answer is "yeah, it is pretty much this bad." My story
is a parable. It is the exaggerated, anime kind of cartoon version but
it is all about real issues that people are facing online, out on the
net every day. I could go on and on about it. In fact, I am going on and
on it because I've got to go to Gartner. They're doing one of their
gigs, consulting gigs in Washington and I'm supposed to go down there
and talk to all these people about how screwed up it is and get this off
of my chest, a kind of hammer and tongs style version and it is an
unpleasant task but they already paid me so I'm going to have to go.
Maybe I'll learn something. I mean, I commonly do when I go to
Washington. I just went to Washington. This is the last day of a very
extensive book tour to support this book. And guys are sidling up to me
at these signings and saying: "Yeah, it's worse than what you say. I've
read it and you're right. It's terrible." "So what agency are you from?"
"I'm from*under the hill...*" "You mean to say you're from the NSA, sir?
You're from under Fort Meade?" He just sort of sidles away, leaves
diagonally... Be that as it may, I want to try to get a little closer to
the fire here. I don't want to spend my entire time pontificating about
public affairs because I have to do that in **Wired** every month. I
want try to get a little more hands on with the subject and I've tried
to do this with a few audiences on my way here but you guys are the
absolute target demographic for this personal crisis I'm facing. You
e-mail me, send me e-mail, [bruces@well.com](mailto:bruces@well.com).
I've actively soliciting ingenious responses to this really sort of
personal crisis that I'm facing. So now I'm going to background the
problem for you here, ok? Now, in Austin, which is where I live, we have
this social event every year which is called "[South by
Southwest](http://www.sxsw.com/)." South by Southwest has three wings.
It's a cultural conference. It's a festival, I guess you would call it.
There is [South by Southwest Music](http://www.sxsw.com/music/) where
garage bands show up from all over America and all over the planet,
really, looking for an ANR guy and a record deal. You get a wristband
and you wander around in a drunken haze down sixth street listening to
bands. There is [South by Southwest Film](http://www.sxsw.com/film/),
which is kind of the coming thing in Austin lately because we have got
real film directors in town. Richard Linklater lives in Autin and he's
making a film adaptation of Philip K. Dick's **A Scanner Darkly**.
Richard Rodriquez spends a lot of time in Austin. He's mister spy kids
and he's doing all of this stuff. Sandra Bullock lives there and Quentin
Tarantino shows up with his posse. It's a very odd thing like having
your town infested with Sumatran fungus. There really didn't used to be
any movie people in Austin but now there is there is a little movie
scene in my hometown and it's kind of adorable and fun to watch. Then
there is the third part, which is my people here, which would be [South
by Southwest Interactive](http://www.sxsw.com/interactive/) which is the
geek set in my town, right? It used to be South by Southwest Multimedia
and it's not like an industry gig. These people are cyberculturati.
These are weblog guys, meetup guys, vaguely political online
organization characters, Electronic Frontier Foundation fellow
travellers, EPIC guys, computer game designers, SIGRAPH habituaes,
washed-up former virtual reality visionaries, dazed sort of
half-conscious linux programmer loonie free-software characters, and
science fiction writers. So I've gone to this every year since they
started it because I knew the organizers and these are just people out
of my milieu. So every year [I have a party here at South by
Southwest](http://wiredblogs.tripod.com/sterling/index.blog?entry_id=258972).
It's my Open House Party. It's a very "Information Wants to be Free"
kind of party. I just go there. I'm always booked to do something: I'm
on a panel. I give a speech or something and traditionally I end my
speech by just inviting the whole audience over to my house for free
beer. "Aw boys, we're all going over to my house for free beer!" They
show up. It's not difficult to give away free beer. I don't know why
people think that this is expensive. If you just price it out, a keg of
beer, you can get someone really drunk for seventy-five cents. Plus
people bring their own beer. They bring lots of liquor. My
organizational principle for this party, which has been going on for
just donkey's years now, is that you can bring anything you can carry
and anyone that you trust. Right? Strangers show up and that's kind of
the point. It's not like I hand out little laminated cards and say "Yes,
you can go by the novelist's house." It's just that we literally throw
the doors open and people just show up. There's never been an incident.
People have a really good time. You can't predict who's going to be
there. I really enjoy talking to people that don't know that I'm the
host. They are like "God, this guy's taste in art, what's with this?" I
like to attend my own party and that's kind of a thrill for me. It's
just a little social thing that I do. It's fun and it's sort of our big
social outreach for my wife and I. It's what we do to kind of pitch in
and give back a little bit. It's pleasant and it costs us just a few
hundred bucks. It's nothing like a budget breaker. It's not the cost
that's any kind of trouble. You can make two or three hundred people
really happy for the cost of...I don't know...a laser printer or
something. Why not? Right? It's not a big problem. Well, this year, I
did have a big problem. This year I had a problem because there were 200
people in my audience and I say "Ok, everybody is going over to my house
for beer!" and they say "Yay!" and 600 people show up at my party. They
weren't the people in the audience. Half the people in the audience
normally attend because it's on the last day and a lot of people leave
anyway. They showed up and some kind of flash mob thing occurred. There
was some kind of electronically assisted gathering happening at my
house. Because people were showing up and they were showing up in buddy
lists. It wasn't just the usual foot traffic of one and two people.
There would be at half-past one...there were sudden clusters or armadas
of taxis coming in from two or three directions and people would get out
of the taxis and are name-checking each other and sort of clustering
together and coming into the party in a mass. Guys are phone-camming the
party. It's like "He's not kidding, look there's a keg here!" and off
they come. Actresses are showing up, which is sort of interesting
because there is never much cross-over into the film thing. Guys are
coming up and saying "Bruce! Your party's full of *hot chicks!*" There
are girls in lingerie tops with stiletto heels. They aren't actually
partying. They're not eating. They're there to display themselves so
they kind of swan anorexically through this crowd of unix sysadmins and
they're, like... <Bruce makes really goofy surprised face\> They're
awe-struck. Somebody had told them that it was sort of necessary to go
make the scene at the novelist's house and they sort of arrived in a
bloc, united by phones, I assume, and then departed. So it was lively
and they were a very well behaved group. There was no...they were very
sweet, kindly people except more and more of them started showing up. So
around 1:45, the cops show up and I'm in there pontificating as is my
wont. Someone says "Gee Bruce, the police are out on the porch and I
think you'd better come see this." So I go out there and it's one cop.
He's an Austin cop. He's a very nice guy but he wants to see some I.D.
so I'm handing this over. He says, "So Mr. Sterling, is this home?" <in
falsetto\> "Yes, officer." "Well, Mr. Sterling, we are receiving noise
complaints from your neighbors and let me just tell you the drill here.
I'm giving you a verbal warning and if I have to return, I'm going to
have to write you up a citation. If I have to return a third time, I'm
going to have to take you downtown." I'm talking to this guy and I say,
"Well, that's very interesting officer but what if you take me downtown
and people continue to arrive at the party? Because they aren't being
issues invitations. They are just sort of arriving spontaneously. What
are you going to tell these 600 people when there is no host and you've
arrested him?" He didn't like that question. I didn't like the question
either because it was kind of loud. "Gee, Officer," I told him, "We're
not playing loud music. It's a very well behaved crowd. This is South by
Southwest." Well, it was half past one and he said, "You're not playing
music but you're talking and people can hear you talking two blocks
away." They *could* here us talking two blocks away. There was uproar.
These people had a lot on their minds. They were talking about politics
and current affairs. They weren't talking about business because there
isn't any in their line of work but they had a lot to confess to one
another. They were crying on each other's shoulders, whatever. So I
hustled them all inside the house, got them off of the porch, it was
beautiful weather. Packed them into the house, shut the doors. That was
when the spontaneous self-organization happened. This was a little
weird. I've never witnessed...I've had big parties. This party was 50%
bigger than last year's party. Last year was maybe 350 people. This year
was 600 easy. So it's half past one and I'm down to, maybe, 175 people
but they're all inside the house and our house is on an open plan. There
is a kitchen, a big room, a bathroom and so forth. Well, normally,
people just wander from room to room with their drinks and beer or
whatever. This time, they are moving en masse. There is this outbreak of
herd behavior. It's packed. It's packed like it is in here and people
just start moving along the room. There is this spontaneous emergent
order. They're actually... <Bruce walks along following a
wall\>...swirling around the house and you don't get to get out of the
way. They are coming in all these groups and the people in front of them
see them coming and they're moving and the whole thing begins jostling
in this spontaneous crowd flow, which is hairy because if someone yells
"Fire" in a situation like that, there is going to be real injuries. I'd
never seen that happen in my house before. So, this is my problem,
right? I have reached some kind of critical limit in these parties. You
keep adding quantity and eventually there is a qualitative phase change
here. They were nice about it and finally I got them to leave. I just
announced that all of the liquor had been drunk and they left. There
were no casualties and it was fine. But that's not what concerns me.
What concerns me is next year's party. Because I don't have any way to
define the proportions of this party nor do I have any security
mechanisms in place, nor do the police. Which is kind of interesting.
So, I'm now going to read to you, some of the suggested technical
solutions...<pulls paper from pocket and opens it\>...for what is really
a microcosm of the organizational problems with the global internet, ok?
Because this is my personal incarnation of what is really a much larger
problem, a problem that scales up. What is the problem here? The benefit
is that I'm bringing in strangers. It's like I'm reaching out and
touching someone but the downside is that I'm bringing in strangers and
they can reach out and touch me. The benefit is that I'm breaking the
boundaries of my narrow circle of acquaintances but the downside is that
I'm breaking the boundaries of my narrow of acquaintances. The plus side
is: this is a really popular party but the downside is that this is a
*really popular party!* I'm now hovering at the edge of a potential
dystopian development where I can get one guy that shows up in order to
wreak mischief and can hurt a lot of people in some sort of cascading
effect. I don't have any...Well, let's just talk about possible
solutions. I think I've defined the problem sufficiently. It's a problem
that you ought to recognize. So, what do I do?

1.  Here's one solution: Go Professional.

I'm a very popular guy. Why don't I just start a bar? It will be
"Bruce's Cyberpunk Bar." This is what you do and there are hundreds of
these things in Austin. People come in and they get the beer and they
*pay you* for the beer. You get an insurance license and you rent a
building. You hire employees and you establish some kind of formal
relationship with the police. You card people when they show up to make
sure it is legally possible for them to drink. Maybe I could hire bands!
This is like the AOL/Time-Warner version of what was formally this kind
of freeware, open, loosy goosy, kind of...you know? Why don't I just do
that because it's certainly been done? This is the standard way of
handling the subject. Well, yeah, ok, but then I'm a bartender. I'm a
guy that owns a club and I don't really want to own a club because it is
a lot of hassle and most of them go broke. I don't mind doing it once a
year but, Jesus, every day? Five times a day? Weekends? I've got no
weekends and I'm a bar guy suddenly? I'd never get to go out in daylight
because I'm down there managing all of these drunks. I don't think so.
That's not really it.

1.  Solution number two: The Party Emergency Response Team.

Well, I've got pals who basically show up for these parties. There is a
hardcore set of dudes who really get it about Sterling's parties. These
are sort of the core recruiters. They are the sysadmins of the Sterling
scene. Maybe I could deputize these guys. They are my closest buddies.
Maybe they aren't at the party but I can make an emergency response team
for guys that get it about my parties. I can brief them about it and
maybe I'll give them a semi-uniform style thing. I'll get a buddy list
of my own and it will be like "It's getting out of control, call the
PERT!" and they'll rush in. Maybe they'll just start phoning people, I
don't know. They don't have the downside of being actual cops. They
don't have to wear a badge or be, sort of, really accountable in any
way. They're just like a private militia...there sort of like Blackwater
or something. A private military company. Basically, it's the CERT
except its the PERT and they're there to react immediately when a party
goes out of bounds. Well, I kind of like that idea actually because it
kind of suits my organizational style but the downside is: I'd have to
join it. Then I'd have to worry about *their* parties. Do I really want
to get up out bed at 2:00 AM when I could be watching Bollywood movies
and pile into my car and drive over to Sixth Street. "How did you let
your friggin' party get out of control?!" Do I want to go put out the
fires and other people's parties? I'm not going to able to just do it by
myself. The CERT is a cooperative group. What kind of dues am I going to
have to pay to belong to this org? I don't *go* to that many parties. I
mean, I only have one. I don't want to go to parties all of the time,
especially parties that are no damn good.

1.  Ok, well, now I've got a more subtle solution. This is the
    [Rand](http://www.rand.org/) solution here. A sort of Arquilla and
    Ronfeldt groovy, **[Advent of
    Netwar](http://www.rand.org/publications/MR/MR789/)**, solution.

If you've ever read these Rand guys, Advent of Netwar, rockin' book!
September 12, 2001, I called these guys up. "Man! You are futurists of
the first water! You were predicting states would be attacking non-state
actors and that all hell would be breaking loose. You guys are something
else!" Well, they got a lot of credit for that: Arquilla and Ronfeldt.
So, anyway, what Arquilla and Ronfeldt say in their Rand futurist
analysis of how to deal with an out of control network is we can't have
a war on a network because states are hierarchical and networks are
distributed. What you need is a **counter network.** A counter network.
Just like **Advent of Netwar**. So here's my plan. I have plants at the
party. Who are there secretly and sort of organized with one another.
And they aren't really made clear to the party members that they are
there at all. They are covertly there. They are covertly organized. They
have secret handshakes and recognition symbols. What is their job? Their
job is to monitor the party and see if enthusiasm is moving into an area
of untoward radicalism. So they don't do anything blatant. What they do
is stage small but effective party spoiling scenes. Women would be
especially good for this, I think, because no one ever thinks they are
capable of political organization. You get a woman from your
counter-network to just sort of burst into tears spontaneously at the
party and just sort of start muttering to herself something along the
lines of "That bastard! I can't believe he would dump me right in the
middle of Bruce Sterling's party! \*sniff\* Call my mother!" A little
cluster comes around and they are patting her, trying to bring her down
and people say "Aw man, this is a bad scene here. What's with the chick
over there, man?" Or you might have a guy that gets kind of boisterous
at the party and have someone who gets really boisterous at the party
who joins them but feigns he's on PCP or something. So if one guy starts
misbehaving, this guy's like an agent provocateur. He's just
stumbling......he's taking the edge off the growing enthusiasm, sort of
like the carbon rod in the nuclear pile. Well, I'm giving serious
attention to that one actually.

1.  Ok, now there's the architectural solution.

Maybe it's a technical problem, ok? I can engineer the kegs because the
kegs are the locus of the party organization. So let's just say, maybe
my kegs are too low-tech and what I need is a *keg firewall*. It's
measuring the amount of fluid that is coming out of the kegs and is the
party is getting to boisterous, they just start busting out air. "Hey
man, the keg's not working! The keg's not working at Sterling's house.
Aw man, the keg's are dry." and then they leave and then the kegs just
spring back up. They're just sitting there, watching network traffic,
and if it gets too heavy, the kegs kick out. Or you could have *keg
mirror sites*at someone else's party and it just pops up on the keg that
says "Hey, you're being slashdotted here! Why don't you go to Fourth
Street? There are lots of kegs there!" Have appealing little pictures of
the kegs moving around on them. Maybe webcam photos. "Oh, this party is
so much fun over here! Why don't you go to that party?" Ok, that's sort
of a techy solution but then I'd have to wire up the kegs. The guys that
I rented the kegs from might not like my new interface on the keg and
people might accuse me of making darkness the standard. The keg tap
might not interop quite right with other kegs. The guy might have badly
formulated his kegs and I get sudden bursts of people from other parties
and I don't really want the guys from their party to use my site as a
mirror site. What if I had to debug the kegs? What if flaws are
discovered and the patches have patches? I don't know.

1.  Then there is the Transparency International solution.

This is a kind of NGO solution, the democratic solution. When I go next
year and invite all of the people to my party, I could make a clean
breast of it. I could say, "Look, I'd love you to come to my house and
have a really nice time but I have to make it clear to you that we're
facing a potential political crisis at my house. It's time for me to
level with you, the party people. I'm just going to have to appeal to
your personal sense of responsibility as citizens to come to my party
and not screw it up for anyone else. I want you to watch one another,
police one another. I trust you. I don't want to enforce anything on
you. I want to devolve the party down to the grassroots level. It's up
to you, you, you. This is your party, not merely my party. You are the
community to whom I'm trying to appeal. You need to assemble as a
community. Hold hands with one another, support one another. If you're
too tired to chew, pass it on." Maybe, maybe.

1.  Now there is one other possibility, and we're getting a little hair
    now, this is kind of pushing the limit of parties.

If there is a bad incident at a party, I'm worried about future parties
because I think it may be necessary to have a War on Parties. I might
put magnatometers into the doors, check people's bags, make them take
off their shoes. We'll just get some terror theatre installed around the
party. We'll have orange netting, I.D. badges which have your legal name
on them rather than the name by which you are known at parties. I may
have to make it clear, as the host, that I carry a gun. I am allowed to
carry a gun in my own home in Texas. We have an open weapons law. I
could just wear a uniform and carry a gun. I don't think they'd get too
out of bounds if the host had a gun. If one gun wasn't enough, I could
carry two guns. That's a possibility.

1.  Another possibility, Total Party Awareness.

I think it would be possible to install video cameras and monitoring
equipment throughout the home. I think it would be good to have people
sign a disclaimer when they arrive at my party consenting to be video
taped and to have their remarks at the party recorded. Now, I think that
this would have a very calming effect on the party. In fact, I'm not
sure that that gathering would even be classifiable as a party but I
could probably pack a lot of people into an area like that.

1.  Another possibility, legal disclaimers.

I'm thinking party shrinkwrap. You just don't get a beer unless you
break the shrinkwrap. There is something written on the beer that is
really long and kind of inexplicable but you are required to take some
small moral action before you drink the beer. Put your name on it, I
don't know.

1.  There is a literary solution. Sharecropping the party.

I did have some guys show up. "This parties great! Why don't you have
our corporation sponsor your party, Mr. Sterling? We've got this really
cool building downtown and there is lots of empty space. We'd love to
have you put your name on our corporate party." **Bruce Sterling CTMR
presents Intel's Blast 2005!!!** I'd just be renting out my celebrity
like the billboard for somebody else's organization. They'd pick up all
of the tab and presumably hire thugs, give people free shit, you get
mouse pads or whatever. The upside is that they'd handle all of the
hassle for me and they'd probably put on a better feed than me but the
downside is that all of my friends would accuse me of becoming a
corporate sellout. I would be sheltering under their profit driven
organization. And who knows?

1.  The last solution, which is probably an underestimated possibility,
    I could ask a charity for help.

I could make my party a fund-raising event for somebody that is morally
unimpeachable. Red Cross. Greenpeace. I could have my choice. There are
lists of charities. Right wing charities. Left wing charities. Hip
charities. Dodge charities. Sobbing-into-your-hankerchief March of Dimes
crippled kids charities. Children dying of obscure illnesses. Anti-AIDS.
Whatever. Whatever demographic that you want to hit, there is some kind
of NGO and you ask for money. It is a community leader thing. "Well, I
have this resource among my friends and it is time for us to go out and
see to it that this particular intractable social problem is somehow
dealt with." I don't know but I'm sure that it would mellow the scene
out considerably. Because, (a) most people just want the free beer. They
don't want to get hit up for ten bucks by some nitwit with a clipboard
and (b) also it lends it a kind of moral gravity. "Oh look how mature
the party host is here, he's angling for a seat on the city council.
He's moving from party animal to community leader. He's going to build
us a music museum or some god-forsaken thing." Well, it works!!! Now
those are all that I've managed to think of but I'm sure that's not the
entire possible gamut of methods by which I could deal with this. My
situation is quite serious. It really is a conundrum. It's a security
problem. It's a societal problem. It's a social, cultural, literary
problem. It's a personal problem of my own. My credibility is at stake
here. Although I've written a book about computer security which goes
into agonizing detail of the intractability of some of these
difficulties, I can't solve the problem within my own damn home. I have
no solution. And who's got it? Who has got it? If you tell me, I will
publicize it. If you will think about it, I will be happy. If you will
send me e-mail, I will take you with utter seriousnesses. It's a funny
problem but a real problem. Thanks for your attention.
