---
author: admin
date: '2004-06-23 00:09:49'
layout: post
slug: mom
status: publish
title: Mom
wordpress_id: '148'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

This is something that I wrote to my mother in an e-mail conversation
about whether I approve or disapprove of her, her decisions in life and
the role of love. Parents seem to be a reoccurring theme lately given
that one of my directs had a parent pass away this week and another two
coworkers have both lost a parent within the last few months.

> I've never said that I disapprove of you. I neither approve nor
> disapprove of many of your life choices. I'm not in your shoes and I
> don't have your perspective. None of that has anything with approving
> of you, personally, though. You have the official "Al Seal of
> Approval" if you like. It strikes me as personally odd that you would
> desire my approval. Isn't it supposed to be the other way around? :-)
> I'd never even considered approval or disapproval before reading your
> e-mail. It's a non-issue to me. I do love you and I think that you are
> largely doing well with your life these days. I'm not sure what I
> would have thought of you in your 20's and 30's but then I've made my
> own share of weird or bad decisions so I'm not really in a position to
> say what anyone should be doing with themselves either now or in the
> past. I'm a cranky bastard and I have an opinion about everything but,
> and this is an important point, an opinion isn't the same as a formal
> judgment of other people, except inasmuch as their relations to me.
> There are people out there that I think are pigfuckers or complete
> morons but that has nothing to do with judging them except when
> deciding whether to relate to them and have them in my life. I think
> you and I are pretty different from each other spiritually but that
> might just be an artifact of perspective. I don't have much personal
> motivation for devotional actions and am not terribly theistic most of
> the time. You seem quite the opposite. Over time, I find my interests
> and those of most pagans or occultists diverging. So much of the pagan
> community seems to be people operating in the same, tired patterns as
> everyone else in our culture, which has significant issues. I'm not
> interested in the nature of the world just in order to be cool or have
> power over others, regardless of what my motivations were at 18. We'll
> see though. :-) I do love you. I just don't always know how I'm
> supposed to relate to you. We haven't even really lived together for
> 18 years... Like all children, I'm not sure if you really understand
> who I am but then I don't think R does much of the time other. We're
> all mysteries to each other. As to the pain of the world, I don't need
> therapy for what I feel. Betrayal of dreams is part and parcel of
> growing up and finding the dissonance between childhood dreams of life
> and reality, especially in an isolated world like urban America. I
> think there is a reason so many people find solace in alcohol, drugs,
> sex, hedonism of any empty sort. It fills the hole that they don't
> even know how to describe to themselves but is all too there. That is
> part of the flaw that runs through the heart of the world. It's a hole
> shaped like your soul, a comfortable fit, never filled and, in the
> end, it is not something that can be filled. One of the things that I
> think Buddhism teaches quite well is that this hole is like the water
> and brooms in the Sorcerer's Apprentice. It can't be filled or emptied
> and trying to do so continues to empower and drive this engine of
> suffering. Look, ma, I'm all philosophical and shit. This is what too
> much freetime and too many books will do to you.
