---
author: admin
date: '2004-09-08 21:34:52'
layout: post
slug: real-underground-cinema
status: publish
title: Real Underground Cinema
wordpress_id: '228'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

**In a secret Paris cavern, the real underground cinema** Jon Henley in
Paris Wednesday September 8, 2004 The Guardian Police in Paris have
discovered a fully equipped cinema-cum-restaurant in a large and
previously uncharted cavern underneath the capital's chic 16th
arrondissement. Officers admit they are at a loss to know who built or
used one of Paris's most intriguing recent discoveries. "We have no idea
whatsoever," a police spokesman said. "There were two swastikas painted
on the ceiling, but also celtic crosses and several stars of David, so
we don't think it's extremists. Some sect or secret society, maybe.
There are any number of possibilities." Members of the force's sports
squad, responsible - among other tasks - for policing the 170 miles of
tunnels, caves, galleries and catacombs that underlie large parts of
Paris, stumbled on the complex while on a training exercise beneath the
Palais de Chaillot, across the Seine from the Eiffel Tower. After
entering the network through a drain next to the Trocadero, the officers
came across a tarpaulin marked: Building site, No access. Behind that, a
tunnel held a desk and a closed-circuit TV camera set to automatically
record images of anyone passing. The mechanism also triggered a tape of
dogs barking, "clearly designed to frighten people off," the spokesman
said. Further along, the tunnel opened into a vast 400 sq metre cave
some 18m underground, "like an underground amphitheatre, with terraces
cut into the rock and chairs". There the police found a full-sized
cinema screen, projection equipment, and tapes of a wide variety of
films, including 1950s film noir classics and more recent thrillers.
None of the films were banned or even offensive, the spokesman said. A
smaller cave next door had been turned into an informal restaurant and
bar. "There were bottles of whisky and other spirits behind a bar,
tables and chairs, a pressure-cooker for making couscous," the spokesman
said. "The whole thing ran off a professionally installed electricity
system and there were at least three phone lines down there." Three days
later, when the police returned accompanied by experts from the French
electricity board to see where the power was coming from, the phone and
electricity lines had been cut and a note was lying in the middle of the
floor: "Do not," it said, "try to find us." The miles of tunnels and
catacombs underlying Paris are essentially former quarries, dating from
Roman times, from which much of the stone was dug to build the city.
Today, visitors can take guided tours around a tightly restricted
section, Les Catacombes, where the remains of up to six million
Parisians were transferred from overcrowded cemeteries in the late
1700s. But since 1955, for security reasons, it has been an offence to
"penetrate into or circulate within" the rest of the network. There
exist, however, several secretive bands of so-called cataphiles, who
gain access to the tunnels mainly after dark, through drains and
ventilation shafts, and hold what in the popular imagination have become
drunken orgies but are, by all accounts, innocent underground picnics.
The recent discovery of three newly enlarged tunnels underneath the
capital's high-security La Sant√© prison was put down to the activities
of one such group, and another, iden tifying itself as the Perforating
Mexicans, last night told French radio the subterranean cinema was its
work. Patrick Alk, a photographer who has published a book on the urban
underground exploration movement and claims to be close to the group,
told RTL radio the cavern's discovery was "a shame, but not the end of
the world". There were "a dozen more where that one came from," he said.
"You guys have no idea what's down there."
