---
author: admin
date: '2004-11-09 13:24:38'
layout: post
slug: scans-of-monks-brains-show-meditation-alters-structure-functioning
status: publish
title: Scans of Monks' Brains Show Meditation Alters Structure, Functioning
wordpress_id: '282'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

***From the Wall Street Journal***\
 **Scans of Monks' Brains Show Meditation Alters Structure,
Functioning**\
 November 5, 2004; Page B1 \
 \
 by Sharon Begley

All of the Dalai Lama's guests peered intently at the brain scan
projected onto screens at either end of the room, but what different
guests they were.

On one side sat five neuroscientists, united in their belief that
physical processes in the brain can explain all the wonders of the mind,
without appeal to anything spiritual or nonphysical.

Facing them sat dozens of Tibetan Buddhist monks in burgundy-and-saffron
robes, convinced that one round-faced young man in their midst is the
reincarnation of one of the Dalai Lama's late teachers, that another is
the reincarnation of a 12th-century monk, and that the entity we call
"mind" is not, as neuroscience says, just a manifestation of the brain.

It was not, in other words, your typical science meeting.

But although the Buddhists and scientists who met for five days last
month in the Dalai Lama's home in Dharamsala, India, had different views
on the little matters of reincarnation and the relationship of mind to
brain, they set them aside in the interest of a shared goal. They had
come together in the shadows of the Himalayas to discuss one of the
hottest topics in brain science: neuroplasticity.

The term refers to the brain's recently discovered ability to change its
structure and function, in particular by expanding or strengthening
circuits that are used and by shrinking or weakening those that are
rarely engaged. In its short history, the science of neuroplasticity has
mostly documented brain changes that reflect physical experience and
input from the outside world. In pianists who play many arpeggios, for
instance, brain regions that control the index finger and middle finger
become fused, apparently because when one finger hits a key in one of
these fast-tempo movements, the other does so almost simultaneously,
fooling the brain into thinking the two fingers are one. As a result of
the fused brain regions, the pianist can no longer move those fingers
independently of one another.

Lately, however, scientists have begun to wonder whether the brain can
change in response to purely internal, mental signals. That's where the
Buddhists come in. Their centuries-old tradition of meditation offers a
real-life experiment in the power of those will-o'-the-wisps, thoughts,
to alter the physical matter of the brain.

"Of all the concepts in modern neuroscience, it is neuroplasticity that
has the greatest potential for meaningful interaction with Buddhism,"
says neuroscientist Richard Davidson of the University of Wisconsin,
Madison. The Dalai Lama agreed, and he encouraged monks to donate
(temporarily) their brains to science.

The result was the scans that Prof. Davidson projected in Dharamsala.
They compared brain activity in volunteers who were novice meditators to
that of Buddhist monks who had spent more than 10,000 hours in
meditation. The task was to practice "compassion" meditation, generating
a feeling of loving kindness toward all beings.

"We tried to generate a mental state in which compassion permeates the
whole mind with no other thoughts," says Matthieu Ricard, a Buddhist
monk at Shechen Monastery in Katmandu, Nepal, who holds a Ph.D. in
genetics.

In a striking difference between novices and monks, the latter showed a
dramatic increase in high-frequency brain activity called gamma waves
during compassion meditation. Thought to be the signature of neuronal
activity that knits together far-flung brain circuits, gamma waves
underlie higher mental activity such as consciousness. The novice
meditators "showed a slight increase in gamma activity, but most monks
showed extremely large increases of a sort that has never been reported
before in the neuroscience literature," says Prof. Davidson, suggesting
that mental training can bring the brain to a greater level of
consciousness.

Using the brain scan called functional magnetic resonance imaging, the
scientists pinpointed regions that were active during compassion
meditation. In almost every case, the enhanced activity was greater in
the monks' brains than the novices'. Activity in the left prefrontal
cortex (the seat of positive emotions such as happiness) swamped
activity in the right prefrontal (site of negative emotions and
anxiety), something never before seen from purely mental activity. A
sprawling circuit that switches on at the sight of suffering also showed
greater activity in the monks. So did regions responsible for planned
movement, as if the monks' brains were itching to go to the aid of those
in distress.

"It feels like a total readiness to act, to help," recalled Mr. Ricard.

The study will be published next week in Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. "We can't rule out the possibility that there was a
pre-existing difference in brain function between monks and novices,"
says Prof. Davidson, "but the fact that monks with the most hours of
meditation showed the greatest brain changes gives us confidence that
the changes are actually produced by mental training."

That opens up the tantalizing possibility that the brain, like the rest
of the body, can be altered intentionally. Just as aerobics sculpt the
muscles, so mental training sculpts the gray matter in ways scientists
are only beginning to fathom.
