---
author: admin
date: '2004-08-17 20:50:44'
layout: post
slug: car-fun
status: publish
title: Car Fun
wordpress_id: '204'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Well, shit, my car is fucked now. I was on my way to pick up my daughter
for dinner and I started here a metal on metal (like disks rubbing
together) from my driver side brakes... It would go lessen as I hit the
brakes and then stop altogether when the brakes engaged. It happened for
about two minutes, then it quit happening to I kept driving thinking
"Should I turn around?" but I was most of the way there and didn't have
my phone. When I was almost to my grandparents' place to get her, it did
it again for a couple of blocks and then stopped making sound.

Needless to say, I didn't put Madeline in my death machine. I visited
with her and my grandparents for a few and then headed back. There was
the same kind of on and off noise making on the way back. Something is
grinding on something in my brakes, though they seemed as responsive as
normal.

There is a "Al's Automotive" (I kid you not) about a mile down Juanita
Drive from our place. I pulled in there. It's owned by a guy named
"Steve" (go figure...even he made a joke about it). R and I drive by it
all of the time and it also has a mess of cars in various states of
disrepair in front of it. Obviously someone's small automotive business.

Steve was technically closed but he was cooking burgers with his little
girl. He had me give him my personal information and I left the car
there with them. He'll look at my brakes tomorrow and let me know what
the damage is. I haven't had my brakes repaired or really worked on
since I got the car three years ago (three this week, in fact) so I
expect that I'm going to be replacing a bunch of parts. Ah well. Happy
birthday to me!

My work is having a little cruise in Puget Sound tomorrow to celebrate
our shipping and finishing the work of the last twelve months. We have
to be downtown at 6:45 AM to leave so I called a coworker and he's going
to pick me up on the way in so at least R won't have to get up before
6:00 AM to take me all of the way into Seattle.

As an act of consolation, I've ordered Jet City Pizza.
