--- 
layout: post
title: Car Fun
published: true
meta: {}

tags: 
- Daily Life
type: post
status: publish
---
<p>Well, shit, my car is fucked now. I was on my way to pick up my daughter for 
dinner and I started here a metal on metal (like disks rubbing together) from my 
driver side brakes... It would go lessen as I hit the brakes and then stop 
altogether when the brakes engaged. It happened for about two minutes, then it 
quit happening to I kept driving thinking &quot;Should I turn around?&quot; but I was most 
of the way there and didn&#39;t have my phone. When I was almost to my grandparents&#39; 
place to get her, it did it again for a couple of blocks and then stopped making 
sound.</p>
<p>Needless to say, I didn&#39;t put Madeline in my death machine. I visited with 
her and my grandparents for a few and then headed back. There was the same kind 
of on and off noise making on the way back. Something is grinding on something 
in my brakes, though they seemed as responsive as normal.</p>
<p>There is a &quot;Al&#39;s Automotive&quot; (I kid you not) about a mile down Juanita Drive 
from our place. I pulled in there. It&#39;s owned by a guy named &quot;Steve&quot; (go 
figure...even he made a joke about it). R and I drive by it all of the time and 
it also has a mess of cars in various states of disrepair in front of it. 
Obviously someone&#39;s small automotive business. </p>
<p>Steve was technically closed but he was cooking burgers with his little girl. 
He had me give him my personal information and I left the car there with them. 
He&#39;ll look at my brakes tomorrow and let me know what the damage is. I haven&#39;t 
had my brakes repaired or really worked on since I got the car three years ago 
(three this week, in fact) so I expect that I&#39;m going to be replacing a bunch of 
parts. Ah well. Happy birthday to me!</p>
<p>My work is having a little cruise in Puget Sound tomorrow to celebrate our 
shipping and finishing the work of the last twelve months. We have to be 
downtown at 6:45 AM to leave so I called a coworker and he&#39;s going to pick me up 
on the way in so at least R won&#39;t have to get up before 6:00 AM to take me all 
of the way into Seattle.</p>
<p>As an act of consolation, I&#39;ve ordered Jet City Pizza.</p>
