---
author: admin
date: '2004-08-22 23:03:42'
layout: post
slug: gnostic-mass
status: publish
title: Gnostic Mass
wordpress_id: '211'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

Today, the only thing I had to do was attend the [Gnostic
Mass](http://www.hermetic.com/sabazius/gnostic_mass.htm) at Horizon
Oasis. I had volunteered to be the negative child in the mass, which is
about as minor of a role as you can get but only the second time that
I've done it. I got up late (around ten), puttered around for a while
and watched the last Millenium Season 1 episode on the third DVD that R
and I received through netflix.

Eventually, the time rolled around and I drove over to the masonic hall
on Queen Anne Hill for the mass. We'd been instructed to be early (about
two hours before the mass started) but the temple was already set up by
the time that I got there. I wound up hanging out, chatting with people
and doing a run through until it was time to do the ritual. Attendance
was low today for some reason, which about a third of the normal crowd,
but I think that we all had a good time.

Afterwards, I went up to Capitol Hill to use one of the gift
certificates that I got on my birthday. I picked up a couple of books,
including **Roebuck in the Thicket**, that I'd been wanting and also
took the time to stop by Musicwerks and get an import CD. A little early
dinner at Bimbo's Bitchin' Burritos and I called it a day and came home.

This evening was mostly occupied with reading **The Iron Council** by
China Mieville. I'm about a third or so of the way through the book now.
It's a fairly quick read and it is hard to get a bead on where he's
going with it but I'm liking it quite a bit. It seems much more overtly
political than his previous books and set a generation or so after
**Perdido Street Station** and **The Scar**.
