---
author: admin
date: '2004-07-13 00:28:36'
layout: post
slug: pissed
status: publish
title: Pissed
wordpress_id: '171'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I'm fucking pissed at the moment. Why is it that some asshole always
wants to play politics in spiritual groups and the like? Is it because
the pond is so small? It's just been insinuated that I treat directives
or messages from a female group leader differently than from the male
leaders of the organization. WTF? It was then insinuated that I have a
problem with women in general though it was couched as the person just
guessing. Part of my response (which was much longer but also included
sub rosa bits):

> Your comments and insinuations about me discounting XXXXX (or women)
> are insulting and offensive. Not just mildly but extremely. I was
> raised by a single mother and Dianic Witch. I was a Witch long before
> I was a magician. I have a daughter of my own and a loving fiance' and
> I do NOT disparage women, discount them because of their gender or
> treat them in some kind of offensive manner. Women have been and
> continue to be a major part of my life as a person and as a man. I'm
> very serious about this. It makes me very angry that you would even
> insinuate that I would treat XXXXX or any other women differently
> simply because of their gender. I may not always be the most level
> headed of people and I'm prone to rash actions at time BUT I am not
> some sort of misogynist. I treat people in a straightforward manner,
> even if my thoughts and feelings are not always agreeable. I respect
> the right of people to be and think differently than me without my
> having to rubber stamp their opinions in order to be my friends. I've
> never been accused of being a duplicitous individual. If I had any
> issues with XXXXX in any manner, I would have clearly stated them or
> at least stated my desire to work with someone else.

Oh, and **fuck you!**

This is all because I, seemingly, asked two many questions about a
pending order action after we were told to express concerns. My mistake.
