---
author: admin
date: '2004-06-23 00:53:18'
layout: post
slug: catching-up
status: publish
title: Catching Up...
wordpress_id: '149'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I haven't written much lately. It isn't for lack of desire but I have
found myself, as I am now, on the wrong side of midnight and with things
to say or at least daily life to relate in lieu of things to really say.

I worked through a bit of fiction this weekend. I finished off Michael
Swanwick's **[Bones of the
Earth](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0380812894/)**,
which was a typically high caliber novel from him. I always enjoy his
work though I think he is really a master of short fiction moreso than
novels. I then read **[The Way of the
Wolf](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0451459393/)**,
which was a fairly light "action-adventure" type of read. I wasn't
expecting much but I found it to be a reasonably well-crafted "vampires
in a post-apocalyptic Earth" book. I'll probably read the sequel but I
expect that I will get it from the library.

On the non-fiction front, I'm still working through Chogyam Trungpa's
**[Great Eastern
Sun](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1570628181/)**, which
is his second "Shambhala" book. I like a lot of what he has to say and
find him pretty insightful but I can't pay the attention that I want to
if I'm tired or otherwise not able to focus well late in the evening so
I've only been reading it when home earlier on, which hasn't been much
lately. I have a number of Buddhist texts to work through, as well as
some books by Namkhai Norbu that I hadn't read yet in the "serious
books" department. I still need to finish **Guns, Germs, and Steel** as
well.

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/gm1-web.jpg)This weekend was
quite busy but a lot of it was "hurry up and wait," which is why I got
to read the Wolf book so quickly. Next weekend is the normal weekend
that I'm supposed to do my work with Wiccan prisoners at McNeil Island
but I'm going to be in Portland this next weekend for Trekchod teachings
from a Bonpo teacher. I moved the session with the guys to this last
weekend but it would up being in the evening instead of early morning. I
haven't decided which is more tiring, getting up at 5:30 AM in order to
arrive at the prison by 8:00 AM for an 8:30 meeting and getting home
around 1:00 or 2:00 PM or leaving home at 3:00 PM in order to make the
5:00 PM ferry to the prison for a 6:00 PM meeting and getting home at
11:00 PM. Probably the former but the latter effectively made Saturday
the "eight hours of prison a-go-go" day. I feel that the session with
the guys went well and I've got some more direction on what we should be
doing over the rest of the year.

Sunday, being Father's Day, had Madeline over to spend time with me. She
brought me a nice card and a gift. She made me another gift but left it
at school. The one she bought is to the right. R thinks my ex-wife did
this to me and must still hate me a little. heh. Personally, I think
Madeline picked it herself, which says something about the nut not
falling far from the tree...

She and I went out to lunch and washed my car. Apparently, in the world
of my child, getting to help me wash my car falls into the "really neat
things to do with papa" camp. Too bad I don't have a fence that I need
to whitewash.

Monday started what has turned out to be a hellishly busy work week so
far (and it seems like it is going to continue down that line since I
have a four hour meeting tomorrow). R and I went over to our Wiccan High
Priestess' place after work for our Summer Solstice rite. This wound up
turning largely into a "dinner and gab" session but I had a nice time
chatting with everyone.

This evening, after working a bit late at work, I had dinner with my
friend, John from work and then went over to Half Price Books. I picked
up copies of:

-   **[The Heart of the
    Buddha](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0877735921/)**
    by Chogyam Trungpa
-   **[The Collected Works of Ken Wilber, Vol. 1: Spectrum of
    Consciousness: No Boundary: Selected
    Essays](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1570625018/)**
-   **[The Collected Works of Ken Wilber, Vol. 2: Up From Eden: The
    Atman
    Project](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1570625026/)**
-   **[What Has Athens to Do With Jerusalem: *Timaeus* and *Genesis* in
    Counterpoint](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0472108077/)**

The last looks to be especially interesting in that it looks at how
interpretations of Plato's *Timaeus* have been influenced by
Christianity's own interpretation of *Genesis*. *Timaeus* was one of the
few platonic texts in circulation in the Middle Ages and had quite an
impact over time.
