---
author: admin
date: '2004-10-21 11:38:35'
layout: post
slug: neal-stephenson-on-fighting-william-gibson
status: publish
title: Neal Stephenson on Fighting William Gibson
wordpress_id: '266'
categories:
- Humor
---
From <a href="http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=04/10/20/1518217">http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=04/10/20/1518217</a>:<blockquote><i><b>4)  Who would win? (Score:5, Funny) - by Call Me Black Cloud</b>
<br><br>
In a fight between you and William Gibson, who would win?
</i>
<br><br><b>Neal:</b><br><br>

You don't have to settle for mere idle speculation. Let me tell you how 
it came out on the three occasions when we did fight.
<br><br>
The first time was a year or two after SNOW CRASH came out. I was doing 
a reading/signing at White Dwarf Books in Vancouver. Gibson stopped by 
to say hello and extended his hand as if to shake. But I remembered 
something Bruce Sterling had told me. For, at the time, Sterling and I 
had formed a pact to fight Gibson.  Gibson had been regrown in a vat 
from scraps of DNA after Sterling had crashed an LNG tanker into 
Gibson's Stealth pleasure barge in the Straits of Juan de Fuca. During 
the regeneration process, telescoping Carbonite stilettos had been 
incorporated into Gibson's arms. Remembering this in the nick of time, 
I grabbed the signing table and flipped it up between us. Of course the 
Carbonite stilettos pierced it as if it were cork board, but this 
spoiled his aim long enough for me to whip my wakizashi out from 
between my shoulder blades and swing at his head. He deflected the blow 
with a force blast that sprained my wrist. The falling table knocked 
over a space heater and set fire to the store. Everyone else fled. 
Gibson and I dueled among blazing stacks of books for a while. Slowly I 
gained the upper hand, for, on defense, his Praying Mantis style was no 
match for my Flying Cloud technique. But I lost him behind a cloud of 
smoke. Then I had to get out of the place. The streets were crowded 
with his black-suited minions and I had to turn into a swarm of locusts 
and fly back to Seattle.
<br><br>
The second time was a few years later when Gibson came through Seattle 
on his IDORU tour. Between doing some drive-by signings at local 
bookstores, he came and devastated my quarter of the city. I had been 
in a trance for seven days and seven nights and was unaware of these 
goings-on, but he came to me in a vision and taunted me, and left a 
message on my cellphone. That evening he was doing a reading at Kane 
Hall on the University of Washington campus. Swathed in black, I 
climbed to the top of the hall, mesmerized his snipers, sliced a hole 
in the roof using a plasma cutter, let myself into the catwalks above 
the stage, and then leapt down upon him from forty feet above. But I 
had forgotten that he had once studied in the same monastery as I, and 
knew all of my techniques. He rolled away at the last moment. I struck 
only the lectern, smashing it to kindling. Snatching up one jagged 
shard of oak I adopted the Mountain Tiger position just as you would 
expect. He pulled off his wireless mike and began to whirl it around 
his head. From there, the fight proceeded along predictable lines. As a 
stalemate developed we began to resort more and more to the use of pure 
energy, modulated by Red Lotus incantations of the third Sung group, 
which eventually to the collapse of the building's roof and the loss of 
eight hundred lives. But as they were only peasants, we did not care.
<br><br>
Our third fight occurred at the Peace Arch on the U.S./Canadian border 
between Seattle and Vancouver. Gibson wished to retire from that sort 
of lifestyle that required ceaseless training in the martial arts and 
sleeping outdoors under the rain. He only wished to sit in his garden 
brushing out novels on rice paper. But honor dictated that he must 
fight me for a third time first. Of course the Peace Arch did not 
remain standing for long. Before long my sword arm hung useless at my 
side. One of my psi blasts kicked up a large divot of earth and rubble, 
uncovering a silver metallic object, hitherto buried, that seemed to 
have been crafted by an industrial designer. It was a nitro-veridian 
device that had been buried there by Sterling. We were able to fly 
clear before it detonated. The blast caused a seismic rupture that 
split off a sizable part of Canada and created what we now know as 
Vancouver Island. This was the last fight between me and Gibson. For 
both of us, by studying certain ancient prophecies, had independently 
arrived at the same conclusion, namely that Sterling's professed 
interest in industrial design was a mere cover for work in 
superweapons. Gibson and I formed a pact to fight Sterling. So far we 
have made little headway in seeking out his lair of brushed steel and 
white LEDs, because I had a dentist appointment and Gibson had to 
attend a writers' conference, but keep an eye on Slashdot for any 
further developments.</blockquote>
