---
author: admin
date: '2005-05-26 19:05:08'
layout: post
slug: madison-progress
status: publish
title: Madison Progress
wordpress_id: '465'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
---

Ah, Madison...how do I name the joys of the midwest? Is it the flatness
or the smell of cows? Actually, it's pretty nice in Madison right now. I
am surprised. It's been sunny with minimal clouds. It's about 60+ when
we go out in the morning and doesn't get higher than the mid 70s or so
during the day. There are almost no bugs. I can't imagine better weather
to be out in unless there were a few more clouds. We just finished the
second day of the five day Dzogchen retreat with Younge Khachab
Rinpoche. He's teaching from the Khandro Nyingtig, the "Heartdrops of
the Dakinis", a phenomenal Dzogchen teaching. As one would expect, it
focuses on the Dakinis or Sky Dancers. They are, in most ways, the
goddesses of Tantric Buddhism. There are many different classes from
wisdom dakinis to cthonic ones to "self-arising" ones. The teachings
focus on the culmination of the generation and completion stages of
tantra in atiyoga (or Dzogchen). One of the methods being used is a
special form of tummo. We're working with
[Vajravarahi](http://asianart.com/exhibitions/svision/i20.html)
(primarily) and Hayagriva as her consort. Yesterday, we did the
empowerments for the teachings and then a long teaching by Rinpoche.
Today, we did the various Tsa Lung practices, those that focus on the
channels and winds in the body and their manipulation. Tomorrow, we will
be doing Trekchod or Cutting Through teachings. Saturday is Thogyal
teachings. For the mornings, we have an excellent translator who is both
a practitioner and a Harvard educated scholar of Tibetan culture and
language. He has a very nuanced understanding of the language, which
helps. Being a practitioner helps as well. I've taken lots of pictures
but I don't have the right connection on the laptop to pull the photos
so it will have to wait until I am back. I'm sharing a room with my
friend, Bill Bainbridge, and we're sharing our vehicle with another
friend, Elisabeth, who is a Bon practitioner. Saturday night, we are
going to dinner with Rinpoche, Hilary (his attendent), John, the
translator, and his wife (Sandra?), who is also a translator. I expect
to have a good time. I'm also firming up my plans for bringing Rinpoche
to Seattle in mid-August. He'll be teaching on generation and completion
stage practice, commenting on a Longchenpa text, and giving the
empowerment and a teaching for Longchen Nyingtig
[chod](http://www.dharmafellowship.org/library/essays/chod.htm)
practice. Here is an image of Vajra Varahi:

![Vajra Varahi](http://www.zhangzhung.net/pics/VajraVarahiz1.jpg)

And an image of a Chod practitioner (that's a human thighbone he's
playing along with his drum):

![image](http://www.zhangzhung.net/pics/chodpa2.jpg)
