---
author: admin
date: '2005-11-20 00:36:29'
layout: post
slug: moovies
status: publish
title: Moovies!
wordpress_id: '597'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Mooovies! This has been the movie weekend so far. Friday night, R and I
met Denny and Sophia Sargent after work to go see **Mirrormask** at
**The Crest**, which is the local $3 theatre. Denny had seen it before
but was excited to again. R and I both liked it quite a bit and I'm
quite happy that I got to see it on the big screen. It wouldn't have the
same impression on a tv screen from a DVD. I'm not sure what the
criticism was that people had with it as I found it quite interesting
and enjoyable.

![Orbiting Giants](http://www.arcanology.com/images/orbiting-giants.jpg)

Sure, it doesn't have the world's most developed plot but it is a dream
imagery movie oriented towards kids and weird adults. The visuals were
stunning. My favorites are the Orbiting Giants and the Sphinxes.
("Hungry!") I found the Music Box Dolls a bit creepier than I would have
if R and I hadn't seen the episode of **Millenium** where the demon-lady
(Satan?) captures the special kids, holds them in cells and plays the
same song by the Carpenters twenty-four hours a day. Watching an episode
playing that song constantly kind of set an association for me... I will
definitely be getting this on DVD when it comes out. I want to watch it
with Madeline when I have a chance. Today, R and I went and saw
**Serenity** now that we've watched all of the episodes of **Firefly**.
It's still playing in one theatre in the area. We tried to go to the
show just after noon but it was sold out so we wound up going this
evening. As people have said, it was like a long episode of the show. I
enjoyed it but wasn't overwhelmed. I was kind of annoyed by the
unnecessary death (for any plot reason) of two of the characters.
Killing off one, I could have handled easier but the second one was
especially pointless and didn't really add much to the plot. I was
hoping to see more of the central planets but that's ok. There is a
certain suspension of disbelief required to watch River go to town on
people though. Now that I've watched the movies, I need to get back to
work on my papers. I have two short papers for one class and a decently
short one for Mr. 15 pages for a paper. All three are due by December 2
so I want to try to get two of them done as quickly as I can since my
dad is coming this week. Fortunately, he's going to be doing stuff with
other family members in the area as well and will also have his own car.
I'll be very glad when this term is over. Hopefully I can keep my 4.0
GPA. If I manage it this term, that will be 15 graduate credits in a
program that is officially a 30 credit program so I will be halfway
through. Six of my credits are my thesis and I probably won't get to
that until next Fall if all goes as planned. My mentor/prof (he's a prof
this term, mentoring my independent study next term and will be my
thesis committee chair) is still trying to get me to go to conferences.
He's off to the American Academy of Religion (AAR) meeting this week,
including the Pagan Studies section, and was wondering why I wasn't
going. I explained to him about my work commitments along with class and
he seems a bit more understanding now. He is really encouraging me to
write a paper for one of the upcoming Esoteric or Pagan oriented
Religion conferences to present. I'm considering doing it for the
experience not to mention that if I do want to go for a PhD at some
point, presenting at a conference won't hurt.
