---
author: admin
date: '2005-02-08 22:38:03'
layout: post
slug: first-history-paper
status: publish
title: First History Paper
wordpress_id: '391'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---

This is a copy of my first History paper for my graduate history class.
We were required to read a particular text introducing the study of
history. The first assignment was defined as:

ASSIGNMENT I (See Gustavson Study Guide before reading)

Due: Week 5 \
Length: 7 Pages \
Format: Essay with occasional page references (in parentheses) \
Grade: 30% of Course Grade (See "Tips for Effective Essays" and "An
Important Word \
About Facts" in this course guide before you begin writing.) \
Read: Gustavson, entire book (Preface, too), AND this course guide.

Questions to Answer:

1.  There are several approaches to history. How does Gustavson approach
    and define the study of history? What is your opinion of this
    approach? (Chs. 1-2)
2.  Gustavson represents several driving forces that influence and
    change history, each the subject of a separate chapter (Chs. 4, 7,
    8, 10, 12, 14, 15). Discuss, analyze and comment upon TWO of these
    forces.
3.  Gustavson states that methods of historical thinking can be
    profitably used in everyday life. Apply "historical mindedness" to
    your personal or professional experiences (from your own life).

\*Please Note: Use concrete examples, preferably from history, to
support generalized statements wherever possible.

This is my near final draft. I'm not entirely happy with the opening and
the closing so I may do a bit more work here.

## Assignment 1

L. Albert Billings

Dr. James Jeffers

HUX501: Defining the Humanities: History

Gustavson gives an overview of why the study of history is important and
not simply the focus on the seemingly dead past and shows history as the
study of the causes and social forces that lead to present
circumstances. These causes and forces, while having their immediate
beginning in individuals, follow repeating aggregate patterns. One way
to analyze these forces and the role of history in current circumstances
is through the development of historical mindedness in students.
Gustavson defines this as “’a way of thinking,’ a form of reasoning when
dealing with historical materials and present-day problems.” (5) This
skill must be actively developed in order to truly grasp history and its
development is the goal of the student of history. It is also a skill
that can be used in analyzing current events and their connections to
the past. In this paper, I will examine the value of the study of
history and examples of the social forces as discussed by Gustavson. I
will also discuss the nature of historical mindedness and apply it to an
event in my own experience as an example.

In addressing the value of history, Gustavson states that “History gives
perspective” (2). He uses the analogy of looking out from a high place
to see the influences that shape current events and culture. Another way
to say this is that history gives context to individuals for the world
that they inhabit. It allows people to see the whole of which their
current lifetimes and the associated events are only the most visible
part. The events of today will become the next history. The future will
derive its events and institutions from the developing present, which is
derived from the historical past. The problems faced by people today are
the same problems that they have always faced with only the details
changing over time. Gustavson states, “The first important idea to grasp
in studying history is that the world in which we live, the contours we
accept as part of our *modern* world are in reality the outcroppings of
layers laid down in the past.” (22)

This means that the specific problems of today are rooted in the past.
Past history set the conditions or processes that develop or evolve into
the current environment. There is always a prior set of causes which
lead to later results in a never ending chain of cause and effect. As an
example there is the current situation in Iraq. This situation that the
United States finds itself in is difficult to understand without the
knowledge of the West’s colonial era, the creation of the Iraq from the
Ottoman Empire by Britain, and then its subsequent political
developments through independence, monarchy, coup and dictatorship.
Ignorance of these earlier conditions leaves people without a true
understanding of the basis of current conditions, which runs the risk of
repeating mistakes. Gustavson makes an analogy to history being the
assembly of a gigantic jigsaw puzzle (3, 18). The pieces are all of
those previous events or influences that went into the large puzzle
which is our world.

These puzzle pieces can also be said to be organized in regular patterns
as social forces that drive historical events. These forces are not
discrete events even if their immediate manifestations are discrete. For
example, there is a regular pattern to the rise of all revolutions
(which will be discussed below). Gustavson defines social forces as
“…human energies, which, originating in individual motivations, coalesce
into a collective manifestation of power” (28) and spends much of the
rest of the text discussing these forces. These social forces manifest
throughout history in a number of specific forms.

An example of a form is the creation of institutions within societies.
Institutions embody a set of values in a specific manner and have a goal
of encouraging these values in a society. They organize themselves to
further these values. The strength of institutions is that they allow
collective action where a lone person’s actions may not have enough
impact to cause change on a wide scale. Gustavson also states that “they
are a stabilizing element in society, providing, as they do,
organization, order, and social pattern.” (81) Institutions provide
continuity and support of the values necessary for a functioning society
through the use of collective action.

Much of the stability given by institutions is provided by the inertia
and power that becomes attached them if they are disciplined in
maintaining a focus on furthering their values. The continuity of their
existence over time provides stability in a society and becomes an
intrinsic part of a culture. This is a positive aspect of institutions
for most people. For example, the Catholic Church and its sacraments,
such as Baptism and Marriage, provide continuity to people with the
actions of their ancestors through undergoing of the same rites and
shared beliefs in Roman Catholic nations.

Another aspect of institutions is that they all have an additional goal
of perpetuating themselves, regardless of original goals. This goal can
come at the expense of supporting the original values that were the
basis for the institution. In some ways, this may detract from promoting
its values but it must be pointed out that any institution that does not
sustain itself will not survive. Without survival, an institution cannot
further its other goals. Gustavson states of an institution that it will
“…constantly seek to enlarge the number of those subject to its orders
and, if this is achieved, to intensify the degree of control.” (89) He
also states “…’selfishness’ is the principal feature of the
institutional factor in history…” (91) The examples that are given are
those of the Roman Catholic Church and of monarchies. Both evolved into
very different institutions from their initial structures and values. In
response to circumstances, external and internal pressures and the
desire to be perpetuated, institutions change.

The balancing of the positive effects of the values and continuity
promoted by institutions in societies and the potential negative effects
of their inherent selfishness is one of the prevailing tendencies with
this social force.

Another social force outlined by Gustavson is revolution. This is
especially relevant given the repeated events of the 20^th^ century
where revolutionary forces have risen to the forefront of activity in
many nations and have dominated political, social and economic activity.
Gustavson defines revolution as a phenomena “…in which a social or
economic group is superseded in control of the state by another group
under circumstances of violence.” (99) Revolutions are rooted in
discontent over existing conditions in a society and the government or
institutions that support them. The states that are eventually replaced
are usually weak and divided in their actions. Gustavson argues that
“…one must decide that a revolution usually replaces a decrepit
authority with a vigorous one.” (108)

There are a number of popular ideas about revolution that have been
promoted but which are not necessarily true. The popular vision is that
a revolution is led by the citizens of a state rising up to violently
overthrow tyranny or oppressive laws. In reality, only a small
percentage of a population is committed to a revolutionary ideal. People
are often indifferent or actively hostile to change. This is true even
when they are unhappy with circumstances. Gustavson points out that “the
passive spirit of the vast majority of the population, prevented by fear
from finding expression in vocal criticism, nevertheless, by the vary
massiveness of its indifference, erodes away the determination of the
revolutionaries.” (107-108)

Gustavson outlines five common stages to a revolution on page 109. These
can be summarized as follows: individuals publicly point to the causes
of discontent while giving alternative visions to address them, groups
of people engage in acts of disobedience and violence, the ruling social
or economic group passes power to a new group espousing these visions,
the former ruling group engages in a civil war to regain its previous
role, and the new ruling group attempts to realize its vision if it
retains power. The passage of power from the old ruling group to the new
one can fracture into the kind of violence seen during the French
Revolution’s “Reign of Terror,” especially if the new group is not
sufficiently disciplined or united. Over time, even with a successful
revolution, there is a gradual return to previous patterns and
attitudes. Very few, if any, revolutions have had an immediate change on
the values of a people that remained permanently. More often,
revolutions have acted as a means to continue an existing process of
change deriving from the previous values of a society. It is only over
generations that the larger scale changes in the values of society have
occurred.

The study of history gives tools to observant students that allow them
to see the analogies between current situations and those of history
including the social forces at work. Students may also gain some
understanding from these analogies. This understanding of processes and
concepts is the historical mindedness defined by Gustavson at the
beginning of the paper. He states that it has seven key features: the
ability to look beyond the superficial appearance of historical events;
a natural inclination to look for the basis of current events, problems,
and groups in the past; an ability to differentiate the features of the
dynamic forces in society; the inclination and ability to find the
continuities in society from the past through to the present; an
understanding that society is dynamic and constantly undergoes change; a
focus on how things actually are, not how people might wish them to be;
and an understanding that each event is unique and no analogy will be
completely accurate.

In order to become historically minded students must work with and
develop the mindset outlined by those characteristics. These skills are
not obvious and must be worked with over time in order to develop
proficiency. To use them a historian works from a frame of reference,
which is an orderly collection of data about a historical period. The
historian looks at the relationship between ideas, events, people or
pieces of data and attempts to see how they fit into a whole through
associations. As new data is discovered, new relationships to the data
in the frame of reference are examined without becoming overly caught up
in the details of the facts.

A historian studies the outline of the whole as a relationship between
the pieces, not simply a list of fact and dates. From this developing
frame of reference, a skilled historian will then actively ask
questions, examining the data from as many viewpoints as possible. This
process of active thought and questioning is essential to history. The
active use of the mind to study and question the data, not simply to
memorize it, is necessary to integrate it. As Gustavson says, “Only
knowledge that is actually used will become part of oneself.” (10)

Referring back to what I have written on social forces and on historical
mindedness, I can apply this mindset to my experiences professionally. I
work for the Microsoft Corporation, which was recently sued as a
monopoly violating antitrust statutes by the United States government. I
worked at the company throughout the trial and paid strict attention to
it.

Superficially, this trial seems like a relatively simple problem unless
you are a lawyer for either side. It is about the application of an
existing law and the arguing of whether evidence shows that Microsoft
broke the law or not. From this point of view, it looks to be simply
another bit of arguing about the tactics or actions that businesses take
today.

Applying historical mindedness, it is a little more interesting as a
case. The first principle of this view is to look beyond the superficial
appearance of historical events. The second principle is to look for the
basis of current events in the past. Using these principles, I can look
at the role of antitrust law and popular attitudes in the legal case.
Antitrust law has a particular place in American history. Its creation
was part of a reaction to abuses that occurred in the United States
during the late 19^th^ century by corporations such as the various
railroads. Before these laws, monopolies operated in a much freer
environment. Eventually, with legal pressure and public outcry, it was
recognized that their special nature required a different set of laws to
apply to them. This led to the crafting of federal laws to curtail the
abuses of monopolies. These laws, first created in 1887 and extended
through the early part of the 20^th^ century, applied immediately to
monopolies on physical resources. They were extended over time and have
now been applied to an Information Technology (IT) company which has
control over non-physical resources.

The American view of monopolies and their previous abuse were a factor
in the Microsoft case along with the company’s actions. This was simply
because of it being an antitrust case. Popular comparisons were drawn in
the press between Bill Gates and the “Robber Barons” of the 19^th^
century. It can be said that the legal basis of the fight, the analogies
between Microsoft and monopolies of the past, and between Gates and
monopolists like Andrew Carnegie are examples of continuity with the
past. The same kinds of problems occur again and again. The fifth
principle of historical mindedness states that society undergoes change
and is not static. It could be said from this that there was no actual
continuity with history. This would mean that the trial was simply an
attempt, for political or economic reasons, to make a link where none
existed and to apply monopoly laws meant for different kind of problem
in another era to a different kind of problem today.

Certainly, elements of both of these viewpoints are true. It is true
that Microsoft is legally a monopoly. The courts upheld this during the
trial. However, it is also true that it is a much different kind of
monopoly than those that existed in the 19^th^ century when the end to
end production, transport, and sale of certain goods or services was
completely controlled by a single entity. In examining this, I am
reminded of the seventh principle of historical mindedness, that each
event is unique and that no analogy will be completely accurate. The
importance here is to see the connections and analogies between events
today and those of history.

I find Gustavson’s approach to be a refreshingly different viewpoint
than the one taught in my own primary education. That form of history
seemed to be only concerned with lists of facts, dates, and chains of
events without understanding of issues. It ignored much of the
interrelationship between events over time, social forces, or the
cyclical aspects of history where reoccurring events are driven by
similar forces. Gustavson’s orientation to history, through the
principles of historical mindedness and through the examination of
social forces in reoccurring forms, gives students of history a valuable
set of tools. His emphasis on the active questioning of assumptions and
ideas and the relation of them to a frame of reference provides an
approach to history that allows a better understanding of the nature of
historical events. The value of Gustavson’s tools of historical
mindedness is that they allow students to apply the lessons of history
to current events and to see the reoccurring patterns in society.

**Works Cited**

Gustavson, Carl G. A Preface to History. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Company, Inc., 1955.
