---
author: admin
date: '2005-06-10 23:31:05'
layout: post
slug: coworkers
status: publish
title: Coworkers
wordpress_id: '481'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Sometimes I wonder about why I don't fit in with many of my coworkers. I
know that a lot of them were very similar to me. They were part of the
geek crowd in school, became engineers, etc. Actually, thinking about
it, I don't fit in with those guys always but I understand them well
enough. They are often in their geek cone of silence working away on
code and such. I can grok the fullness of a cool hack or a neat gizmo so
I can talk to them. The people that I find myself unable to relate to
are more of the management types. (This is amusing since, until the last
few months, I'd spent most of the last five years managing a small team
and working with managers as peers.) The senior ones are especially
troublesome. In a lot of ways, they reek of "suit" to me and I don't
like suits really. Some of my coworkers clearly never worked a menial
job in their life. If they did, it was a high school or college job they
did for cash. They certainly didn't work a shit job and have that
Devil's choice of "Food or bills?" every paycheck. My boss is an obvious
exception as he worked in the call-center trenches just like I did. A
lot of these guys seem to have come from families with money who sent
them to expensive schools like Dartmouth, Amherst, Harvard, Cal Tech,
etc. Then MS recruited them straight out of school and gave them all of
the money, stock, perks, etc. when they were 22 or so. The management
people are usually ones that have been at the company longer than me so
their stock was actually worth a lot. Fast forward ten or fifteen
years... I don't begrudge them the money, the nice cars, etc. They are
often nice enough people with no real issues but they aren't my kind of
people. I can relate to them when we have common interests but we'll
never be friends, just friendly. They have expensive dinners together
and talk about wine, golf, whatever. They BBQ together sometimes. I hear
them talking about it and I feel momentarily jealous. Then I realize
"Well, shit, what would we talk about anyway?" My boss, who is a friend,
has made it clear that my sense of humor and inappropriate remarks have
given people pause in the past. I suppose I seem weird, obnoxious (at
times) and not fitting into their mold. The amusing thing is that the
people that I relate best with, other than a few friends who are peers
here and there, are the contract workers. I used to be one of them.
They're often geeks who worked their way up from nothing customer
service jobs into being testers. They don't have engineering degrees a
lot of the time. They've learned things the hard way, had shit jobs, and
wanted more. I used to be one of them eight years ago. I know that I've
lost touch with it but their lives are much more like those of my
friends. They listen to the same kind of music as me. They get tattoos.
They are occasionally occultists, Burners (that's Burning Man, folks),
or otherwise into weird shit. I'm much more likely to run into them at
something like**Circus Contraption** (that I posted about last week)
than I am to find them at some wine bar in downtown Redmond wearing a
polo shirt and driving a Beamer. I had lunch with my friend, Tim, today.
He's one of the contractors that used to work for me. He's a good guy.
In fact, I think he might be one of the nicest guys that I know even
though we don't talk all of the time. He's working through his shit but
he still has a good time. If I needed to move a body, I'd call him. He's
got the mohawk, cut off camo pants, and tattoos going. We went to the
last working man's bar in Redmond, **The Mustard Seed**, today. We had
some burgers and beer and played a few games of pool together. Good
times. This is mostly thinking out loud and if any of my management
acquaintances read this, you don't need to be offended. I still like you
well enough. You just aren't likely to be hanging out watching strippers
juggle fire while Skinny Puppy plays or invoking the gods of our
ancestors on the Solstice. I just wonder why that is. It isn't like
there aren't plenty of people like me or my kind out there. I meet them
outside of work all of the time when I go to events or hang out with
friends. It just seems like a lot of them never get into management or
even corporate careers. There is some kind of weird culture gap.
Sometimes I think it is just me and I'm distant, difficult, and weird
but I really do think a lot of my management coworkers come from some
different place than me and have a different life orientation. How did
this happen? My dad is working class but college educated. My mother is
college educated and professional class. My maternal grandparents helped
raise me and they were a nurse and an electrical engineer. I lived with
them for high school and college, which they paid for mostly at the
local state University. Is it because I never bought into the Republican
dream of prosperity? Is this a side effect of being a hardcore modem
geek and pagan when I was 18 and never getting back on the boat going
upriver? Maybe it is growing up relatively poor when I was little. We
never had problems with food or home that I was aware of but it wasn't
like one of these corporate families with their nice cars, tutors or
sports clubs. My mom worked and we managed to get by. My dad was always
working class and had friends around to drink beer with and play pool.
You know, my house could burn down and I wouldn't give a shit about the
house or my stuff except for my books and my data on my hard drive. The
rest of it is drek and I don't need it. I'd care more about my wife,
cats and ferret surviving than any of the stuff that I own. Kind of a
**Fight Club** moment here... Ah well, fuck it. Friday night. :-)
