--- 
layout: post
title: Rhetoric
published: true
meta: 
  no_lj: "1"
  _podPressPostSpecific: a:6:{s:15:"itunes:subtitle";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:14:"itunes:summary";s:15:"##PostExcerpt##";s:15:"itunes:keywords";s:17:"##WordPressCats##";s:13:"itunes:author";s:10:"##Global##";s:15:"itunes:explicit";s:7:"Default";s:12:"itunes:block";s:7:"Default";}
tags: 
- Daily Life
type: post
status: publish
---
I just got back from a lecture at Queen Anne Masonic Lodge. This is the lodge where I will be taking the first degree of masonry in two weeks (from tonight).

Queen Anne is doing a lecture series on the Seven Liberal Arts. The current master of the lodge is a college professor and he is bringing in experts in the various arts from his school and lecturing himself. I missed the last lecture in January on "Grammar" but managed to make it to this one. The topic tonight was "Rhetoric." The professor was a Communications professor who had done his PhD on some obscure medieval masters of rhetoric.

He went over the original roots of rhetoric in the ancient Greek colony on Sicily, discussing its origins with Corvax. He then discussed how it came to Athens with Gorgias and followed that with a discussion of <strong>Gorgias</strong> and <strong>Phaedrus</strong> from Plato. In these dialogues, Socrates deals with rhetoric a bit. The final bit on the history was a discussion of Aristotle and his variation of emphasis in rhetoric that then became the dominant form for the 2000 years since that time.

One of the things that he went over in this discussion was a discussion of the features of the rhetoric of Corvax, the elaboration of this into the forms of Gorgias and then the additions of Aristotle. He did this with examples of each. He then discussed modern speeches and how the same methods are used in the notable ones. He did a reading and dissection of Martin Luther King's "I have a dream" speech, showing that in its form, cadence, and emphasis, it used all of the traditional rhetorical techniques. This is one of the reasons that, even though it is a relatively simple speech, it has so much power when it is heard.

After all of this, we all sat down for some light food and coffee while chatting a bit. It was definitely an enjoyable evening and I look forward to the series continuing.
