---
author: admin
date: '2005-07-03 15:21:30'
layout: post
slug: kingdom-of-heaven
status: publish
title: Kingdom of Heaven
wordpress_id: '503'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

R and I went to see **Kingdom of Heaven** at the local discount theatre
with Denny Sargent and Sophia last night. It's kind of funny but they
are probably the friends that we hang out with the most at this point.
They are really good people and do a lot of stuff that R and I don't
seem to get around to doing, like the ceramics that they do for art and
as a magical act. It's nice stuff and very interesting. It's also
different hanging out with people that are nearly 20 years older than
us. Priorities are a bit different and that might be a good thing.

Denny is a kind and mellow guy and I like hanging out with someone who
is more than happy to deflate my ego if it gets too big and is cool
about it. It's hard to get irritated at someone who is that easy going
and he knows his stuff. I've found that I have much more difficulty when
people try to play "head on train" with me, which happens at work
sometimes. We just wind up escalating back and forth. I've really
enjoyed the spiritual work that we do together as a group. It's nice to
just do workings where it doesn't feel like anyone has anything to prove
or that people are kind of figuring their way in the dark.

As to the movie, I would say it was ok but not great. Visually, it was
nice but the plot line was a bit predictable (or, rather, highly
predictable) and I don't buy the tenth century French blacksmith who can
read and write, fight off a siege and handle suddenly being made into
nobility while going to Jerusalem. The suspension of disbelief required
is high.

As a number of people have said, the portrayal of Saladin is kind of
cool and some of the differences between Islamic and Christian culture
of the time are shown (but not really shown in detail). I always find it
amazingly puzzingly and even troubling that Islamic culture in the
Middle East could have gone from the bastion of relatively advanced
philosophy, engineering, and overall civilization to becoming the
backwater of the world in roughly six hundred or so years while Europe,
in some sense, reversed this. Traditionally, the Muslims were much more
tolerant of other peoples than the Christians ever have been. They've
slid far and it is rather sad because it can happen to any culture.
What's even worse, most of my countrymen will never know anything about
their great culture and just see terrorists when they see Muslims.
