---
author: admin
date: '2005-11-13 21:42:54'
layout: post
slug: weekend-at-berkeleys
status: publish
title: Weekend at Berkeley's
wordpress_id: '589'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I came back to Seattle this morning after my short visit with friends
and family in the Bay Area. I arrived in the early afternoon on Friday
and drove up to my in-laws for a while, where I was staying. In the
evening, I met with Kat and Ashton at a nice Thai placed called "Cha'am"
in north Berkeley. The food was excellent and we chatted about this and
that, mostly catching up or talking about
[Thelemic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thelema) events, work, etc.
After dinner, we went over to a local pub that brews its own beer and
hung out for another hour or two before heading home.

The next day, I stayed in Berkeley for the most part, spending some time
wandering about Solano and purchasing a couple of things at **[The Bone
Room](http://www.boneroom.com/)**, which is where I'd gotten trilobite
fossils in the past. I must say that the resin cast replica fetus skulls
were a tad on the disturbing side. I can envision some burning man crew
walking around with spears with these dangling from them or something
similar.

![Bone Clones Human Fetal Skull - 20
weeks](http://www.boneroom.com/casts/images_bc/human_fetal20.jpg) ![Bone
Clones Human Fetal Skull - 24
weeks](http://www.boneroom.com/casts/images_bc/human_fetal24.jpg) ![Bone
Clones Human Fetal Skull - 30
weeks](http://www.boneroom.com/casts/images_bc/human_fetal30.jpg)

In the mid-afternoon, I went to meet with some of the people from the
**[Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn](http://www.osogd.org/)**. After
chatting for a while, we headed over to **Tandoori Chicken U.S.A.**,
which is this ex-burger drive-in that (you guessed it!) serves Indian
food. It was surprisingly good but the general condition of the place
and the kitchen did not inspire confidence. After this, I attended the
group's meeting at the **[Pax Templi](http://www.paxtempli.net/)** space
and then went out with Mark and James for beers in downtown Berkeley at
a well-known pub named "Jupiters." I finally staggered back to my
in-laws place at 1:00 AM, slept for five hours and then went to the
airport to return the car and catch my flight home. Needless to say, I'm
a little tired today. It's good to be home and it was a fun, short trip.
