---
author: admin
date: '2005-08-01 22:37:15'
layout: post
slug: zen-in-a-stone
status: publish
title: Zen in a Stone
wordpress_id: '520'
categories:
- Technology
---

I found this online this evening. This feeds into my interest in various
biofeedback devices. Would it be a Stone Mirror? :-)

## Zen in a Stone

[http://www.we-make-money-not-art.com/archives/006643.php](http://www.we-make-money-not-art.com/archives/006643.php)
[](http://www.iging.com/ "http://www.iging.com/") [I
Ching](http://www.iging.com/ "http://www.iging.com/")(or the ‘Book of
Changes’) is the most widely read of the five Chinese Classics. In this
system, you think about the question you would like to ask the book,
throw 3 coins, calculate ‘a structure’ and reinforce it in one of the
book’s pages. The page the book offers will provide a kind of Zen text.
The idea is to put one’s mind in motion, trying to understand what the
real answer is in regards to a personal question. The mind will start
processing the question and may find an answer. What if we could
exchange the coin throwing with technology: can technology change or
enhance philosophy in terms of shape? Is it possible to build a
‘magical’ device that could be used following the ‘I Ching’ philosophy?
**First prototype:**
![ching00.jpg](http://www.arcanology.com/images/ching00.jpg) A person
touches the device and asks a question. The biofeedback device (the
GSR2, a Galvanic Skin Response monitoring biofeedback device) will check
his/her bio-status and as s/he becomes more relaxed the device’s
interface reveals an image while in the background the sound of wind
chimes grows in volume. By following this process the individual is
falling into a ‘meditation’ state of mind. After some time, an output of
the relevant text from the Book of Changes is displayed. The GSR2 was
connected to a
[Wiring](http://wiring.org.co/ "http://wiring.org.co/")board, reading
the outcoming sound signal. A [Flash
application](http://www.nastypixel.com/prototype/cms/myfiles/pages/iching/)
connected to the device provides related visuals and sounds on screen.
The prototype was working and people interacted with it with positive
reactions. It was time to push the idea forward in terms of design: on
both a product design and conceptual level.
![ching01.jpg](http://www.arcanology.com/images/ching01.jpg)**Zen in a
Stone** is a modern way of using I Ching, The Book of Changes. It is a
device to be used within a personal environment and from the outside
looks like a simple rounded river stone. Inside the stone is a hidden
biofeedback device with audio capabilities. A person should ask himself
a question while holding the stone in his hand, While the person is
becoming more relaxed and free of thoughts a Zen answer based on the
original ‘Book of Changes’ is played in a soft human voice. Developed by
[Yaniv
Steiner](http://www.interaction-ivrea.it/en/people/y.steiner/index.asp "http://www.interaction-ivrea.it/en/people/y.steiner/index.asp").
With the collaboration of Silvia Rollino, Ofer Luft, Riccardo Strobbia,
Eduardo Brambila, Alie Rose, Nick Zambetti. Via
[Prototype](http://www.nastypixel.com/prototype/cms/wordpress/?page_id=57 "http://www.nastypixel.com/prototype/cms/wordpress/?page_id=57").
