---
author: admin
date: '2005-12-24 03:51:52'
layout: post
slug: merry-yule
status: publish
title: Merry Yule!
wordpress_id: '647'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

R and I just got back from celebrating Yule with our friends, the
Sargents. Denny and Rebecca live fairly close to us and are the couple
with the yurt in a wooded area of their back yard. We've been
celebrating full moons with them for the last year or so and they hold a
yule ritual and celebration at their place every year. I've gone to this
for a while. Denny has written a couple of popular books on either
global ritualism or western occult work. Rebecca, under her writing
name, has written a series of books for the "girlfriend witch" market
(as she calls it). They are both wonderful people and good friends.
During the rite, we do a fairly short clearing of space using five PHAT
syllables in the five directions, a bit of mantra repetition, and then
we read a poem titled "Sol Invictus" about (you guessed it) the
unconquerable sun. We then each light a candle off of the main flame in
the center of our circle. As we individually light our flames in turn,
each of us does an invocation for the coming year. We then do a bit more
mantra chanting and then close. I took a couple of pictures of our lit
altar after we were finished lighting our candles. The disc in the
middle is a Tibetan mirror.

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/3-altar-yule-05.jpg)

Following this, we also did divination for the shape of the coming year
in our lives. Most people were pulling a single card from a tarot deck
going around but Denny, myself, and another did I Ching castings. The
one I cast was this:
![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/Iching-hexagram-06.png)This is
Hexagram 6, which is normally translated in English as "Arguing." The
first third and sixth lines were movable or "old" when thrown as well.
I'll save my interpretation but I am still learning to work with the I
Ching. After the ritual, we spent the next few hours with people hanging
out, exchanging a few gifts and otherwise having a good time together.
Hot buttered rum, tea, champagne and various other drinks were consumed
(though not all by everyone). R took a happy holiday photo of me as we
relaxed afterwards...

![Me](http://www.arcanology.com/images/al-yule-05.jpg) **Merry F'ing
Christmas!** I took a few pictures as well:

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/crazy-denny-yule-05.jpg)
**Crazy Denny Sargent**

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/crazy-denny-robert-yule-05.jpg)
**Denny and Robert, co-founders of the Horus-Maat Lodge***Aren't they
just precious scary occultists?*
