---
author: admin
date: '2005-01-02 14:17:02'
layout: post
slug: ma-thesis
status: publish
title: MA Thesis
wordpress_id: '346'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---
I start my Master's program in 8 days...&lt;cue ominous theme music&gt;

I'm trying not to think about it too much because of all of the unknowns about what it will be like to work on the program, do the papers, readings, etc. etc.

The big thing that I really need to do is figure out a decent thesis in the area of History that I want to do. The program allows for independent studies outside of the assigned classes for electives. If there are specific books or areas of study for my thesis, I can arrange to do an independent study for credit. This means that I need to figure out things sooner rather than later.

Here is a list of general areas of interest that I'd posted before that are fairly general:
<ol>
	<li>Neopaganism in the last few decades, specifically in North America.</li>
	<li>Western Esotercism since the Renaissance, specifically English speaking.</li>
	<li>Secret Societies/Fraternal Orders, either the "occult" or more strictly Masonic style.</li>
	<li>Tantric Buddhism and the West</li>
	<li>Fringe religious movements in North America within the last 200 years or so...</li>
</ol>
From this list, I did a <strong>really</strong> rough brainstorming of potential high-level thesis ideas. I haven't really narrowed this down since then. None of these are concrete to the point of being "What question with this thesis answer?" which is where one would want to be before I started work.
<ul>
	<li>Neopagan History in North America
<ul>
	<li><strong>Pacific Northwest Neopaganism:</strong> it's early days, founding members, early or influential groups.</li>
	<li><strong>History of a specific organization or cult of practice</strong>: There have been many groups of different sorts. Horus-Maat Lodge?</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>A History of a Fraternal or Occult Order in North America
<ul>
	<li><strong>Find a specific and obscure occult order and disect its writings, ritual work, organizational structure, etc.</strong> -- I know these are out there. I was a member of one and have a set of materials that match the kind of thing that I'd want to work on but because of obvious issues with bias, personal history, oaths to members, etc. I wouldn't use that one. There have been many others. One back before the last World War or in the 50s would be ideal. The goal here would also have to take into account treating people and beliefs with respect. <em>This is my overall favorite but I have no leads at this point. The Golden Dawn or SRIA is still a possibility.</em></li>
	<li><strong>Scholastic Examination of one of the many 19th Century Masonic Style orders</strong>: similar to the idea above except this would not touch on Esotericism as much. <em>The Sons of Hur</em> or something similar.</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>A History of  a "Fringe" Religious Movement
<ul>
	<li><strong>Role of non-African People in African Diasporic Religions</strong>: Lots of European descended people seem to be getting involved with Santeria or Voudon. How's that work out?</li>
	<li><strong>Obscure Utopian Religious Cults</strong>: There have been a number of groups that I personally know about in the Pacific Northwest, some of which still survive: The Love Israel Family, the Venusian Church...</li>
	<li><strong>The Adinaths/AMOOKOS</strong>: Dadaji and company. Complicated by the sue happy nature of the fellow that claims the copyright on Dadaji's work.</li>
	<li><strong>One of the weird "Western Tantra" Groups</strong>: Like Saraswati or something.</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>Tantric Buddhism in the West
<ul>
	<li>No specific ideas here but it is an interest of mine as a practitioner and an intellectual student of Vajryana and Dzogchen.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
I'm still kind of stumped though. Theoretically, since I'm in a "Humanities" MA, I could do the interdisciplinary focus instead of doing the history concentration and tie in literature, art, or philosophy as well.
