---
author: admin
date: '2005-01-17 22:00:11'
layout: post
slug: rain-rain-rain
status: publish
title: Rain, Rain, Rain
wordpress_id: '370'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Well, it's been pouring buckets for the first time in a long while
today. Given my lack of trust in my roof after the fix, you can imagine
that I looked closely at things. So far, things seem like normal so I
can probably turn the paranoia down a notch. Today, I announced to my
directs (the people that I manage directly...) that I've agreed to take
a different role in our overall organization. I've managed these three
for either two years or one and a half years, depending on the person,
and I used to be the manager for others in the organization. The role
that I am transitioning to is a non-managerial role focusing more on the
process and project management side of the test organization. The
timeline isn't set right now because we have to find/hire someone to
fill my current role but it is the current plan. This will be the first
time that I haven't been the manager of someone (except for a short
transition when I changed jobs last) since late 1999. We'll see how the
new role works out but I decided, for once, to embrace change and just
try something a bit different than the managerial track that I've been
on for a long time. At home tonight, R and I watched the last episode of
the second DVD of season 2 of Millenium. It ends with the first of the
episodes really showing that there is something more to the group than
just the investigative organization. We watched this over Japanese food
that I brought home with me. Afterwards, we did sitting meditation
together for about 20 minutes in our freshly painted (by R!) temple
space downstairs. We're going to try to keep up this as a minimum of
daily practice together. I also received this from Younge Khachab
Rinpoche's program director today: MAY Dzogchen Retreat General date
annoucement These are the dates and topics for the Dzogchen retreat.
**Dzogchen Instructions from the Khandro Nyingtig:** May 25th
(transmission and tsog) Khandro Nyingtig 26th: Tsa-Lung 27th: Trekchod
28th: Togyal 29th: Rinpoches instruction on completion stage of
dzogchen, and possible terma presentation. I plan on attending this
though I have to get specific permission since Dzogchen teachings in
general are restricted. Since I've attended a retreat with Namkhai Norbu
and received the pointing out instructions, it should be fine.
