---
author: admin
date: '2005-03-19 22:53:53'
layout: post
slug: school-and-thesis
status: publish
title: School and Thesis
wordpress_id: '427'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---

Rain, rain, rain. The weather feels almost normal in Seattle again.

R and I had a relatively lazy day at home. After we got up, she went out
to the gym while the cleaners did their monthly cleaning of our
upstairs. It's so yuppie in a way but it makes a big difference in the
house. Since we both work, I don't feel too bad paying for a couple of
hours of work every month.

I'm doing the reading for my next philosophy paper. I turned in my
history paper (more historical theory) this week. After the paper is
done for philosophy, I'm clear until April 22, when my final papers for
each class are due. I'm looking forward to the history one since I got
to choose the book that I'm using.

I'm still trying to figure out whether I need to do the History track,
the Philosophy track, or the Interdisciplinary track. My interests seem
to be sitting solidly on Western Esotericism, particularly Masonry and
esoteric offshoots of the Freemasons. I don't have a specific topic yet.
Given the past (or non-current) nature of much of this, I figure that
History is the best bet. I'm not completely certain and, so far, the
head of the program, who is my history professor right now, hasn't
replied to my e-mail about the matter.

My philosophy prof seems to to think highly of me. We've had some
decently long e-mail conversations back and forth and he offered to
advise my thesis but only if I focus it into areas where he is able to
help and having certain historical requirements from him. He doesn't
want a general history of a group or the like. He wants a focused
problem that includes, for example, a fraternal order. His specific
example was the Ku Klux Klan moving into a particular state at the end
of the 19th century and the problems this raised and the way the group
had to adjust itself there. (He apparently has done research on the
KKK).

I did find out today that two offshoots of Waite's Golden Dawn survive
into the current period. These are the "Magickal Order of the Golden
Dawn" and the "Esoteric Order of the Golden Dawn" (with the former being
an offshoot of the latter).

I think Waite's Golden Dawn survives as well, which is too bad because
it might make a good research topic. I believe I heard that R.A. Gilbert
was head of it at one point but I'm not sure.

Tonight, R and I went out to dinner and picked up a couple of movies. We
bought the director's cut of Donnie Darko, Dr. Strangelove, and the
Princess Bride. The first is a joint decision, the second was mine, and
the third was hers.
