---
author: admin
date: '2005-01-24 00:36:39'
layout: post
slug: pith-instructions-on-the-great-perfection
status: publish
title: Pith Instructions on the Great Perfection
wordpress_id: '375'
categories:
- Buddhism
---

There are those that same Buddhism is life condemning, that it hates the
world and all things in it. While there are definitely elements of that
within some of the vehicles of Buddhism, there are clearly schools of
thought that see the world as self-perfected but simply obscured from
our day to day minds. The world is perfect, even joyous, as it is (or as
it isn't, as the case may be). Once you learn to see the world as it is,
you no longer become as attached to it or the circumstances that you
find yourself in. I found these instructions relating to Dzogchen
online. I assume that they would apply just as much to Mahamudra as I
understand it.

## Pith Instructions on the Great Perfection

**Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche**

The everyday practice is simply to develop a complete acceptance and
openness to all situations and emotions, and to all people, experiencing
everything totally without mental reservations and blockages, so that
one never withdraws or centralizes into oneself. This produces a
tremendous energy which usually is locked up in the process of mental
evasion and a general running away from life experiences. Clarity of
awareness may, in its initial stages, be unpleasant or fear-inspiring;
if so, then one should open oneself completely to the pain or the fear
and welcome it. In this way the barriers created by one's own habitual
emotional reactions and prejudices are broken down. When performing the
meditation practice one should develop the feeling of opening oneself
completely to the whole universe with absolute simplicity and nakedness
of mind, ridding oneself of all protecting barriers. Don't mentally
split into two when meditating, one part of the mind watching the other
like a cat watching a mouse. One should realize that one does not
meditate to go deeply within oneself and withdraw into the world. In
buddhist yoga, even when meditating on chakras there is no introspection
concentration: complete openness of mind is the essential point. The
ground of samsara and nirvana is the *alaya,* the beginning and the end
of confusion and realization, the nature of universal *shunyata* and of
all apparent phenomena. It is even more fundamental than the *trikaya*
and is free from bias toward enlightenment. It is sometimes called the
"pure" or "original" mind. Although *prajna* (wisdom) sees in it no
basis for such concepts as different aspects, the fundamental aspects of
complete openness, natural perfection, and absolute spontaneity are
distinguished by *upaya* (skillful means) as useful devices. All aspects
of every phenomenon are completely clear and lucid. The whole universe
is open and unobstructed, everything mutually interpenetrating. Seeing
all things nakedly, clear and free from obscurations, there is nothing
to attain or realize. The nature of things naturally appears and is
naturally present in time-transcending awareness; this is complete
openness. Everything is perfect just as it is, completely pure and
undefiled. All phenomena naturally appear in their uniquely correct
modes and situations, forming ever-changing patterns full of meaning and
significance, like participants in a great dance. Everything is a
symbol, yet there is no difference between the symbol and the truth
symbolized. With no effort of practice whatsoever, liberation,
enlightenment, and buddhahood are already fully developed and perfected.
This is natural perfection. The everyday practice is just ordinary life
itself. Since the underdeveloped state does not exist there is no need
to behave in any special way or try to attain or practice anything.
There should be no need of striving to reach some exalted goal or higher
state; this simply produces something conditional or artificial that
will act as an obstruction to the free flow of the mind. One should
never think of oneself as "sinful" or worthless, but as naturally pure
and perfect, lacking nothing. When performing meditation practice one
should think of it as just a natural function of everyday living, like
eating or breathing, not as a special, formal event to be undertaken
with great seriousness and solemnity. One must realize that to meditate
is to pass beyond effort, beyond practice, beyond aims and goals, and
beyond the dualism of bondage and liberation. Meditation is always
perfect, so there is no need to correct anything. Since Everything that
arises is simply the play of the mind, there are no "bad" meditation
session and no need to judge thoughts as good or evil. Therefore one
should not sit down to meditate with various hopes or fears about the
outcome: one just does it with no self-conscious feeling of "I am
meditating" and without attempting to control or force the mind, and
without trying to become peaceful. If one finds that one is going astray
in any of these ways, one should stop meditating and simply rest and
relax for awhile before resuming. If, either during or after
meditation,one has experiences that one interprets as results, they
should not be made into anything special; recognize that they are just
phenomena and simply observe them. Above all, do not attempt to recreate
them as this opposes the natural spontaneity of the mind. All phenomena
are completely new and fresh and absolutely unique, entirely free from
all concepts of past, present, and future- as if experienced in another
dimension of time; this is absolute spontaneity. The continual stream of
new discovery and fresh revelation and inspiration that arises at every
moment is the manifestation of the eternal youth of the living dharma
and its wonders; splendor and spontaneity is the play or dance aspect of
the universe as guru. One should learn to see everyday life as a mandala
in which one is at the center, and be free of the bias and prejudice of
past conditioning, present desires, and hopes and expectations about the
future. The figures of the mandala are the day-to-day objects of one's
life experiences moving in the great dance of the play of the universe,
the symbolism by which the guru reveals profound and ultimate meaning
and significance. Therefore, be natural and spontaneous; accept and
learn from everything. See the comical, amusing side of initiating
situations. In meditation, see through the illusion of past, present,
and future. The past is but a present memory or condition, the future
but a present projection, and the present itself vanishes before it can
be grasped. One should put an end to conceptions about meditation and
free oneself from memories of the past. Each moment of meditation is
completely unique and full of potentiality of new discovery so one is
incapable of judging meditation by past experience or by theory. Simply
plunge straight into meditation at this very moment with your whole
mind, and be free from hesitation, boredom, or excitement. When
meditating it is traditional and best, if possible, to sit cross-legged
with the back erect but not rigid. However, it is most important to feel
comfortable, so it is better to sit in a chair if sitting cross-legged
is painful. One's mental attitude should be inspired by the three
fundamental aspects, whether the meditation is with or without form, and
it may often prove desirable, if not essential, to precede a period of
formless meditation by a period of meditation with form. To provide for
this eventuality many classes of preliminary meditation practices have
been developed over centuries of buddhist practice, the most important
being meditations on breathing, mantra recitation, and visualization
techniques. To engage in the second and third of these classes, personal
instruction from one's guru is required, but a few words on the first
would not be out of place here as the method used varies little from
person to person. First, let the mind follow the movement of the breath,
in and out, until it becomes calm and tranquil. Then increasingly rest
the mind on the breath until one's whole being seems identified with it.
Finally become aware of the breath leaving the body and going out into
space, and gradually transfer the attention from the breath to the
sensation of spaciousness and expansion. By letting this final sensation
merge into complete openness, one moves into the sphere of formless
meditation. In all probability the above description of the three
fundamental aspects will seem vague and inadequate. This is inevitable
since they attempt to describe what is not only beyond words but beyond
thought as well. They invite practice of what is, essentially, a state
of being. The words are simply a form a *upaya,* skillful means, a hint
which if acted upon, will enable one's innate wisdom and naturally
perfect action to arise spontaneously. Sometimes in meditation one may
experience a gap in one's normal consciousness, a sudden and complete
openness. This experience arises only when one has ceased to think in
terms of meditation and the object of meditation. It is a glimpse of
reality, a sudden flash that occurs infrequently at first, and then,
with continued practice, more and more frequently. It may not be a
particularly shattering or explosive experience at all, just a moment of
great simplicity. Do not make the mistake of deliberately trying to
force these experiences to recur, for to do so is to betray the
naturalness and spontaneity of reality.
