---
author: admin
date: '2005-01-03 12:53:06'
layout: post
slug: meditation
status: publish
title: Meditation
wordpress_id: '349'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
---

A Zen teacher that I know online received this description of meditation
practice from a student of his and decided to share it with a bunch of
us... "I'm trying to be more mindful and more careful about my practice
- meaning that while I'm sitting, I'm trying to notice when my mind
starts to wander and say to myself 'thinking' and return to the breath.
It's just amazing to me how many layers upon layers upon layers of
thinking there are. A transcript from the inside of my head while
meditating: Monkey Mind: Those barettes I had in the third grade were so
cool, I wonder what happened to them. Mind: Thinking. Return to the
breath. Monkey Mind: Here I am returning to the breath. That's cool that
I remembered to return to the breath. I notice I breathe more slowly
when I'm sitting. I wonder why that is. Mind: Thinking. Return to the
breath. Monkey Mind: Yeah! Thinking! Go back to the breath. Jeez. You're
hopeless. Back to the breath. Wonder if I'll eat anything with ketchup
today. Ketchup is so good. I've heard that lycopene in ketchup is really
good for you and really good for men's prostate glands. Mind: Thinking.
Return to the breath. Monkey Mind: It always cracks me up when people
confuse prostate and prostrate. That's really funny. I'm following the
breath. This is pretty cool. I'm not thinking all that much right now. I
wonder if this is what meditation is supposed to be like, wait a second,
I am thinking! Mind: Thinking. Return to the breath."
