---
author: admin
date: '2005-10-28 23:09:54'
layout: post
slug: me-and-time
status: publish
title: Me and Time
wordpress_id: '581'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

People may (or may not!) have noticed that I'm not posting much. Since
getting back from Thailand, I've been pretty behind and have been
setting priorities accordingly. I haven't paid close attention to the
ol' blogosphere much. People who are close and longterm friends get
their blogs scanned every few days but that's about it. I'm hoping this
will change soon.

I turned in a paper for each class seven to nine days late (which isn't
too bad) but the two weeks that I spent working on those papers are two
weeks where I wasn't doing my assigned class reading. This means that
I'm still at least a week behind in my classes. I have received one of
the papers back (I got a low 'A' on it for no discernable reason) and I
haven't heard back on the other. My next paper for that class is due in
two weeks and will probably be a few days late. The other class is
easier because it only has two more papers total, which can be short,
and they are due by the end of the term. I don't want to put them both
off though because the end of the term is the last paper for the first
class as well. (If that reads muddled, just read "turned in papers, lots
more to do" there).

I also need to turn in an outline for my Independent Study next term on
the current work on Western Esotericism in academia.

Last weekend, the Electoral College of the Ordo Templi Orientis was in
town and Paul Hume stayed with us from Thursday through Sunday morning.
That was fun since I've known Paul since the old PODSNET BBS days around
1991 or so. We had a banquet for the EC on Saturday night and I got to
cart Paul around a bit (in a good way). It's reminded me that I should
probably take the next degree in that order, which I have put off for a
couple of years.

I haven't been following any dramas so if you have tried to kill anyone
(including yourself) or had something else dramatic happen, let me know.

This doesn't even deal with keeping current with my paid job and the
shennanigans there. I did get a new laptop (personal) so I'm hoping to
be able to work on some things on the fly more easily, like schoolwork.

I'm off to home now. My daughter is spending the night tonight.
