---
author: admin
date: '2005-12-14 01:23:50'
layout: post
slug: hypnosis-to-control-pain
status: publish
title: Hypnosis to Control Pain
wordpress_id: '635'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

This was found at
[http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/1/hi/health/4524138.stm](http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/1/hi/health/4524138.stm).

This doesn't really surprise me. My grandmother, a retired nurse,
practiced hypnosis as part of her work with hospice patients to control
pain. Later on, she used it on herself to control pain. I know that she
had dental work (drilling) done without any anesthesia by hypnotizing
herself...

### Brain scans help think away pain

**It may really be a matter of mind over matter - scientists suggest it
is possible to control brain activity to reduce the pain you feel.**
Stanford University researchers found seeing brain scans and using
mental exercises helped reduce pain.

A UK pain expert said the work backed other studies which suggested
changing how people thought about pain could reduce its effects.

The research is in Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.

**Hope**

Thirty-six volunteers took part in the study.

Heat was applied to their palms, with the temperature for each person
set depending on what they found painful.

One group was placed inside a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner
where they were able to watch their brain activity on a moment-by-moment
basis.

They were then shown "live" action images of their rostral anterior
cingulate cortex, an area of the brain responsible for processing pain.

Next, they were given various mental strategies to try to train the
brain to respond to pain differently, such as being asked to think of it
as a relatively pleasant experience.

Over time, the eight people who went through this training procedure
showed an increased ability to modulate their response to pain.

Other groups were either shown no scans at all - and just given
behavioural techniques to help them cope with pain, or shown scans of
different areas of the brain, or those showing other people's pain
responses.

People in these groups showed no changes in how they responded to pain.

**'Brain exercise'**

Dr Sean Mackey, who led the research, said the study findings offered
great hope for people who suffer chronic pain.

"We could change people's lives.

"However, significantly more science and testing must be done before
this can be considered a treatment for chronic pain."

He said it was not clear how people had controlled their brain activity,
but added: "We really don't know how anyone controls their brain to
perform an action."

Laura Tibbitt, 31, who took part in the study, has chronic back pain
caused by a horseback riding accident seven years ago, said she used
different thoughts to decrease the pain while watching her brain scans.

She said: "I'd think of little people on my back digging out the pain,
or I'd think of snowflakes.

"The goal was to exercise your brain, to retrain your brain. Sometimes I
felt like I had made a change in my brain. The pain was never completely
gone, but it was better."

Dr Beverley Collett, president of the British Pain Society, said: "In
some ways, this supports some of what we are already doing in pain
treatment, using cognitive therapy to change how people think about
their pain.

"And we know psychological treatments do help people manage their pain."
