---
author: admin
date: '2005-11-23 18:18:51'
layout: post
slug: my-dad
status: publish
title: My Dad
wordpress_id: '603'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I heard from my dad. He was supposed to arrive in town yesterday but he
missed his flight in some kind of horror story. In the process of
missing his flight, he also lost (or had stolen) his shaving kit. That
wouldn't be so bad except his medications and his checks (and maybe his
credit cards, I'm not sure) were in them.

He finally arrived earlier today but his high school friend picked him
up. He is going to go crash at his friend's place which means he won't
be here until ***tomorrow*** now. He had mentioned before about maybe
visiting my aunt in Everett for Thanksgiving and it seems like he is
(which I found out from his stream of consciousness ramble on the
phone). This means that I may not see him until tomorrow night. If it
gets too late, he could possibly stay there. This means, that my dad who
was going to come in on Tuesday, may not arrive at my home until
Friday...

An hour or so ago the airline called me and asked for my dad's name.
Since this also happens to be my legal name, it was one of those "Well,
this is him but I think you're looking for my dad" kind of things. I
hate it when that happens. In any case, they found his bag. They could
fedex it to us but it won't get here until Tuesday because of the
holidays. I called Lou (my dad) and told him and they might have the
airline put the bag on a normal flight but that means they have to go to
SeaTac on the evening before Thanksgiving to get it. I wouldn't wish
that on anyone.

On the plus note, it means Thanksgiving Dinner may be more quiet since R
and I will be alone here. Madeline is out of town with her mother and
her mother's family until Saturday afternoon.
