---
author: admin
date: '2005-02-08 23:48:19'
layout: post
slug: pantheacon-2005
status: publish
title: Pantheacon 2005
wordpress_id: '392'
categories:
- Spirituality
---

This is the list of events that look the most interesting to me from
Pantheacon 2005. R and I will be attending this from February 18 through
21 in San Jose, CA.

# Friday, February 18

## 2:00 PM Friday

Glenn Turner and friends

**Opening Ritual**

Join us as we open the conference with a blessing of this space and
sharing our strength and the diversity of our community. We will
introduce ourselves and see how far we have come from both far places
and widely diverse spiritual paths.

\

## 3:30 PM Friday

Anaar

**The Divine Twins**

Through a visual presentation and guided meditation, participants will
explore the mystery of the Divine Twins, the most difficult Feri deity
to fully comprehend. By the end of the workshop the apparent paradox of
the Gods who are fully opposite and completely the same will be
resolved.

\

## 7:00 PM Friday

Ár nDraíocht Féin

**Ár nDraíocht Féin - Ritual**

Come one, come all to a Celtic Druid Ritual with Ár nDraíocht Féin. Ár
nDraíocht Féin, A Druid Fellowship, is an international fellowship
devoted to creating a public tradition of Neopagan Druidry.

Venee Call-Ferrer

**Altar Building for personal, environmental, and social change.**

The creative process is a powerful catalyst for change. The intention
with which we work in our medium can create extensive change for
ourselves and for our world. Altar building is communing with the divine
and active mediation, magical in its own right and an amazing art form
to communicate ideas to the community. Learn how to create powerfull
interactive altars that invite and engage the community. Check out the
temple in the Magical Acts Suite for a sampling of my work!

\

## 9:00 PM Friday

Lael Willingham

**Feel the Drum**

NOT a drum jam! Learn drumming for magical purposes. Ever felt your
blood rise with the thrum but never picked up a drum; want to, but are
intimidated by the “superstars” – this workshop is for you. I LOVE to
drum - Get acquainted with a drum in new ways, learn their voices, care
and feeding; techniques for trancework, meditation, and energy;
“signals” & etiquette of group drumming, basic rhythms. ANYONE can be a
vital part of a drumming circle. (drums not required but encouraged)

# Saturday, February 19

## 9:00 AM Saturday

Denny Sargent

**Pagan And Animist Traditions of the Holy Guardian Angel**

Based on research gathered over the last decade for the recently
published book YOUR GUARDIAN ANGEL AND YOU (Weiser, 2004), this
presentation explores the past and current roots of the ‘Guardian Angel’
concept in Pagan and Animist traditions worldwide. ATMAN, IL, EL, KA,
KAMI, MASTER OF THE HEAD, ALLY, TOTEM, PLEROMA or SOPHIA….What links all
these terms into one coherent image is the central concept what Jung
called the Self, or the HGA. This presentation will explore these ideas
and practice

## 11:00 AM Saturday

Gretchen Faulk

**The Mystic Rose - Soul, Symbol and Sacred Feminine**

Meaningful to the West as the lotus to the East, the Rosa Mystica is a
multi-layered passion. A 16th cent. work said: “This symbol has profound
meanings in all branches of Hermetic mystery, as well as in the
symbolism of Universal Mythology.” From Aphrodite to Aleister Crowley,
from the Virgin Mary to the Golden Dawn, the Rose reigns as a supreme
symbol of love, Goddess, and the soul blossoming towards the Divine.
Join us as we experience the Rose in art, poetry and the spiritual
imagination.

## 1:30 PM Saturday

Dr. David Shoemaker

**Parzival: The Grail Legend and the Mystical Path**

This presentation will explore the myth of Parzival and the Grail, in
light of its mystical symbolism and relevance to personal spiritual
attainment. We will also connect the story of Parzival to the Gnostic
Mass of Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica. Anyone with an interest in
Arthurian/Grail legend, Qabalah, or the Gnostic Mass will likely enjoy
this presentation.

Ile Orunmila Oshun

**Ancestor Reverence: An African Perspective**

Ancestor reverence is a part of many cultures around the world. We will
talk about the prayers, songs, alter-building, divination, and
appropriate offerings from an African perspective. The ancestors live
and everyone has ancestors; therefore, this presentation will be
cross-cultural. Participants: Please know the names of some of your
ancestors.

Diana L. Paxson

**Divine Horsemen: A Panel on Possessory Experience**

A panel discussion of possessory experience as it manifests in different
spiritual traditions today, including practitioners from Umbanda, Wicca,
Hellenic and Heathen groups.

\

## 3:30 PM Saturday

Thelema Lodge OTO

**Gnostic Mass**

Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica (E.G.C.), or the Gnostic Catholic Church, is
the ecclesiastical arm of Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.). The E.G.C. is a
Thelemic religious environment, dedicated to the advancement of Light,
Life, Love, and Liberty through alignment with the Law of Thelema. The
central activity of the E.G.C. is the celebration of the Gnostic Mass,
as set forth in Liber XV, composed by Crowley for O.T.O. and E.G.C. in
1913.

Teish

**A Cast Of Cowries: Sacred Stories from Odu Ifa**

Performances and dramatic readings of the myths and stories of the
Orishas. This is an interactive presentation which includes
visualization, chanting, music and movement. Teish will perform classic
Orisha tales drawn from the Sacred Orature of the Yoruba tradition, her
original poetry and spiritual autobiography.

Cherry Hill Seminary

**Cherry Hill Seminary -- Professional Pagan Ministry Education**

Panel discussion on the concept of Pagan "clergy." What knowledge and
skills should Pagans who may be called to public ministry to acquire?
What roles are we assuming as our movement matures and takes a more
visible role in society at large? What values do most Pagan share? How
can then be fostered with seminary education? What is distance learning?
Meet in terraspace the West Coast faculty of this cyberspace school.

Donald Michael Kraig

**Hypnosis 102**

In this workshop we'll \*briefly\* recap what was covered in my previous
workshop on hypnosis, including what it is, what it is not, and why it
has not worked for you in the past. Then we'll move on to examine ways
to use hypnosis in ritual, including unique ways to work with hypnosis
to channel magical energy toward a desired goal. As an added feature,
everyone who wishes to will experience being hypnotized in a way similar
to that of famed psychiatrist and hypnotist Dr. Milton Erickson that
entirely ignores the "you are getting sleepy" or "as I count down"
methods and instead, simply tells an enchanting story.

## 7:00 PM Saturday

Pagans in the Academy: Sabina Magliocco and colleagues

**Magic in the Academy**

We know there's no Hogwarts's, but can you actually study magic in
school? What is the relationship between Paganism and academia? Which
academic disciplines are exploring magic,witchcraft and paganism, and
how do you pick a good place to study? How do we incorporate ethical and
magical principles from our spiritual lives into our academic practice?
Come join this panel of academic teachers and students – all of whom are
Pagan -- for a lively discussion of these issues and more.

T. Thorn Coyle

**Developing Will: Accepting the Power of Choice**

Will and intention are the most potent magical tools we have. In this
experiential workshop, we will experiment with developing our will. In
Anderson Feri Tradition, the blade is the tool of will. Walking the
blade's edge of choice, we hold opposition to strengthen our magic. When
we reach the tip of the blade, opposition becomes one within us. What
will we choose then? Bring a willingness to move and a question you may
be currently engaged with.

Erin Johansen

**Kali Maa: Tradition, Devotion and Puja (Ritual)**

Come learn about and participate in devotional worship of the Divine
Mother, Dark Goddess of India, Kali Maa. Exploration of Her Wisdom
Tradition in Shakta Tantra made accessible to the West.

## 9:00 PM Saturday

David Ponkey

**Tales of the Hindu God Shiva**

Ganesh, the elephant headed Hindu god, is the Lord of Beginnings. He is
traditionally honored at the start of all activities. Come, hear how
Ganesh got his elephant head, how he lost his tusk, and why he has a
snake tied around his belly. We will meet his father Shiva, the God of
Destruction, and his mother Parvati, daughter of the Himalayan
Mountains. There will be demons and monsters, rats and dancing statues,
even the occasional human.

Seidhjallr

**Oracular Seidh**

Now, as in the ancient North, seers and seeresses journey to the spirit
world to find answers to our questions. All are welcome. This session is
limited to 60 people, please inquire at the Asatru Hospitality suite for
more information on other sessions.

## 11:30 PM Saturday

The Hella-Called

**Hella Blot - A devotional blot in honor of the Norse goddess of the
dead**

In Norse tradition a blot is a feast or ritual in honor of a deity or
set of deities. Sacrifices are made, blessings requested, and oaths
taken. It is a time when we gather to thank our gods for all they
provide, and celebrate their presence in our life. Tonight we will
invite Hella, goddess of the dead, to join us here in Midgard, to thank
her for all she has done to care for our beloved dead. Please be aware
that there will be aspecting of the deity on the part of designated
clergy only. Note also: As in the lore, Modgud will be challenging those
who come to enter this realm. Come with clear intentions. If interested
in more information on Hella first, look for the Discussion Group
earlier in the day on Saturday.

# Sunday, February 20

## 9:00 AM Sunday

Holly Allender

**Hatha Yoga**

This class offers a time to relax, stretch, and energize yourself for
the day. Hatha yoga is a gentle technique that allows students to modify
poses for added challenge (or ease!) depending on experience. Hatha Yoga
focuses on a bold opening and expression of the heart as well as the
discipline and training of the body. It’s a fun and playful way to
practice yoga.

\

## 11:00 AM Sunday

John Michael Greer

**The Druid Revival**

For three hundred years people in the Western world have drawn on the
ancient Druids as inspiration for a living nature spirituality for
today. Join John Michael Greer in a traditional Druid teaching ceremony
and share in the legacy of three centuries of modern Druids. Think
"Meso-Pagan" Druidry is stuffy and irrelevant? Come prepared to be
surprised.

Elie sheva

**Fundaments of Amcha-Israeli Nature Spirituality**

WoRkshop submission 1: New to Pantheacon "Fundamentals of Hebrew Nature
spirituality-Highlights". This workshop highlights: a)Beliefs common in
the Amcha Tradition:mysticism animism and Godforms 2)Practice: overview
of daily practice 3)Practice: the Cycle of the Seasons:overview of
calendar events 4)Amcha shamanism and divination

\

## 1:30 PM Sunday

Donald Michael Kraig

**Sri Yantra: The Tantric Tree of Life**

Perhaps the most sacred symbol in India—some people even worship it— is
the Sri Yantra, an interlocking set of triangles surrounded by circles,
symbolic lotus petals, and finally an outer "square" that serves as
doorways to its many secrets. Mystically, it functions as a sort of
super Tree of Life, and is used for everything from healing techniques
(it may be a source of the meridians of Oriental medicine), and a guide
for astral travel to a place where goddesses are located and worshiped
to obtain favor. In this workshop you'll learn the basics of the Sri
Yantra, its symbolism, and how to work with it.

Orion Foxwood

**Ancestors and Inner Allies**

At the core of most indigenous folk magic practices (such as Faery,
Southern Conjure/ Hoodoo, Hedgewitchery and Cunning Traditions in
America) are techniques, lore and rituals associated with the “unseen
company”; those denizens of the invisible world that affect the
physical, emotional, mental, social and spiritual components of our
lives. These contacts include such beings as Faeries, nature spirits,
deities, tutelary spirits and the often overlooked, ancestral dead. But
what are these beings?

David Shultz

**Ethical Trance Possession for Practitioners**

Come join us as we discuss the appropriate whys, whens and wherefors of
trance possession. The current trend of "come on down anytime" has a
number of us in the community concerned and we're creating this space to
talk about the issues that have come up.

\

## 3:30 PM Sunday

Mary K. Greer

**The Secret Tradition in the Minor Arcana**

There is a hidden dimension to the Waite-Smith Minor Arcana that is
clearly delineated in Waite's works on the Holy Grail and Freemasonry
though never before revealed. Learn how these meanings, conveyed through
the greatest myths of the Western Magical Tradition, can add depth to
your readings.

Jason Augustus Newcomb

**The New Hermetics: 21st Century Magick**

This workshop introduces you to a system of simple and practical methods
for illumination and power. The New Hermetics is a synthesis of Qabala,
Neuro-Linguistic Programming, Yoga, Alchemy, Jungian Archetypes,
Hypnosis, Wilhelm Reich's energy theories, Leary's Eight Circuit Model
of Consciousness, and Scientific Illuminism. The New Hermetics can
quickly unlock the latent potential for excellence and cosmic power
within you.

\

## 7:00 PM Sunday

Daniel Gautier

**Hermetic Mysteries, Botticelli & Worlds Beyond**

This slide lecture will examine Philosophical Paganism and the
Rennaiasance Orphic/Naturalist magic of Marsilio Ficino, as well as
discuss their effect upon the artists Botticelli and Raphael and later
developments in Western mysticism and occultism.

\

## 9:00 PM Sunday

Sam Webster & John Michael Greer

**Masonic "Birds of a Feather"**

Are you a Pagan Mason? Do you know one? Do you want to be one or are
just interested in how any of us could do this? Then come and share in
an open conversation about Masonry and Paganism. You may be closer to
the Craft than you realize!

Hammer of Thor Kindred

**Well and Tree Seidh**

Hammer of Thor Kindred is proud to present a new form of Seidh for the
Folk. As the Asatru community moves forward, our practices will evolve
and grow with each local community. Members and associates of Hammer of
Thor Kindred have gotten together and created a Seidh ritual unique to
our Kindred, one that reflects our values and beliefs. We may take a
more conservative approach than some, and we feel that fits in well with
both our kindred members and our commitment to the community as a whole.

# Monday, February 21

## 9:00 AM Monday

Ardantane

**Creating a Pagan Sanctuary**

Have you ever thought about creating a Pagan school, retreat center,
sanctuary, shrine, hostel, or festival site? Or are you in the middle of
doing it? Come talk with Amber K and Azrael Arynn K, who are creating
Ardantane seminary from the ground up. Discuss visioning, legal status,
building a cadre of volunteers, buying land, building Earth-friendly
facilities, making ground rules, and lots more PRACTICAL and MAGICKAL
stuff!\

## 11:00 AM Monday

T. Thorn Coyle

**The Triple Soul in Feri Tradition**

The Triple Soul appears in many cultures and magical systems. We are
each a sacred trinity, both human and divine. Using movement, trance and
song we will learn to align our soul and become more ourselves, standing
strong, beautiful and shining. Step into your Godhood and discover your
wholeness.
