---
author: admin
date: '2005-09-11 16:16:46'
layout: post
slug: tantra
status: publish
title: Tantra
wordpress_id: '551'
categories:
- Buddhism
---

This was posted at
[http://www.garethswebsite.net/2005/09/further-questioning-of-new-kadampa.html](http://www.garethswebsite.net/2005/09/further-questioning-of-new-kadampa.html)
by someone familiar with Buddhist practice but not Tantric Buddhism. I
thought it was a interesting impression of things even if it is NKT.

> ### Further Questioning of the New Kadampa Tradition
>
> Tantra: The Secret Mantra. One of the elements of the Kadampa
> Tradition that I sometimes struggle with is the idea of the Secret
> Mantra practice, having not received any Tantric empowerments, I've
> not practiced the Secret Mantra, so this post is based on information,
> rather than experience. The Secret Mantra, taught by Buddha
> Shakyamuni, offers a way to transform desire and attachment into
> enlightenment if practiced correctly. Does the practice work, I don't
> know, it's a very complex set of visualsations and meditations, but I
> have a feeling that if practiced with enough faith, it could deliver
> what it promises: permanent Bliss, and through channeling this into
> meditations on emptiness, enlightenment. The visulisations and
> meditations are quite esoteric. There is s complex model of the body
> with three channels and different winds of energy that flow, and red
> and white drops that flow through the channels. The essence of Tantra
> is to begin to visualise yourself as an emanation of Buddha in a Pure
> Land, and view all beings as enlightened. All levels of Tantric
> practice turn great bliss into enlightenment - the bliss is fed into a
> meditation on emptiness. The highest levels involved visulisations of
> sexual embraces with a consort, and transforming this bliss into
> enlightenment - very advanced practitioners may take an actual consort
> and channel the bliss from this into their meditations. But as
> Geshe-le warns
>
> > It should be noted, however, that it is very difficult to use great
> > bliss as a method for attaining enlightenment, and if we are able to
> > do so we have indeed attained a formidable accomplishment. As the
> > great Mahasiddha Saraha said, 'Everyone is excited by copulation,
> > but very few can transform that bliss into the spiritual path.'
>
> The practice is called Secret Mantra, and is an individual practice
> with the emphasis on discretion, I've not spoken to anyone in great
> depth about their Tantric experiences, and speculation along these
> lines may prove troublesome, and not ultimately worthwhile. One of my
> questions was whether the practice merely replaced one set of
> delusions with another, and that the state of eternal bliss might to
> be an awake one. However I'm told that using the energy the practice
> creates in a mediation on emptiness leads to enlightenment. This leads
> on to questions I was asking my Teacher about merit, and the reply was
> the same, the energy/state of mind created through virtuous actions is
> fed into and supports the meditation on emptiness. I also asked if
> it's possible to form an attachment to merit, and the idea of rebirth.
> Of course it is, the attachment depends on the intention behind the
> action. If the intention is correct, and we have achieved a correct
> view of emptiness we don't attach to the practice of accumulating
> merit. I also asked about the nature of Samsara and the Pure Lands,
> and the Hell Regions. I had been concerned about the nature of these -
> did the Kadampas believe in a literal Pure Land? My Teacher assured me
> that it was our view of this world that determined it's appearance and
> not the world itself. An idea I was much more comfortable with, and
> that fits in neatly with the other teachings I have been exposed to.
> The more I study the practices, the more they seem to make sense, they
> all seem to rely on the correct view of form and emptiness, without
> the practice of this meditation it would be very easy to become
> attached to the religious side of the faith. Nacho gave some wonderful
> advice in his comment to my earlier post, and it's something I'm going
> to take on board.
>
> > Yet, it seems to me that you can practice your Zen and attend the
> > center and practice in the NKT. Follow the Buddha's advice: what
> > works for you? How can you make skillful choices in order to live
> > the path/practice as best as possible. How can we live the Buddha's
> > dictum that he only taught "suffering and the end of suffering." ?
> > The NKT sangha can be a source of joy and support, even while your
> > practice might differ.
>
> I'm going to continue to practice with the NTKs as well as my own Zen
> practice, my NKT teacher assures me I can take onboard as much or as
> little of the teaching and tradition as I feel comfortable with, one
> of the great things about Buddhism. And I shall be remembering
> Buddha's words, that James of [The Buddhist
> Blog](http://thebuddhistblog.blogspot.com/2005/09/reason-and-common-sense-in-buddhism.html),
> with perfect timing, recently posted.
>
> > Believe nothing, no matter where you read it, or who said it, no
> > matter if I have said it, unless it agrees with your own reason and
> > your own common sense. \~Buddha
>
> *posted by Gareth @ [6:39
> PM](http://www.garethswebsite.net/2005/09/further-questioning-of-new-kadampa.html "permanent link")*
