---
author: admin
date: '2005-06-04 17:42:12'
layout: post
slug: sweet-jesus
status: publish
title: Sweet Jesus!
wordpress_id: '472'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I know what I want to do Sunday night now!!!! DORKBOTSEA 2nd ANNIVERSARY
MEETING AND CELEBRATION IT’S… **TESLA NIGHT!!!** at **6:00 PM** at
[**CoCA**](http://cocaseattle.org/) on **SUNDAY, JUNE 5TH** Join
dorkbot-sea regulars and irregulars, teslaphiles, technophiles, artists
and aesthetes for an arc and spark-filled night as we celebrate the work
and influence of the most visionary of so-called mad scientists - NIKOLA
TESLA **See…** VIDEO of Tesla-inspired devices in AWE-INSPIRING ACTION –
from [**SRL**](http://srl.org/)’s Seattle show and beyond! **Hear…**
FOUR FANTASTIC SPEAKERS talk about their work with Tesla-inspired
technologies!! **Bring…** out your Jacob’s Ladders, your Tesla Coils,
your plasma balls, your bladeless turbines, your old radios, your
strange medical instruments: anything and everything Tesla-inspired more
than welcome (Vandergraaff generators and the like equally encouraged)!
[**Click for show and tell
guidelines**](http://dorkbot.org/dorkbotsea/events-tesla.shtml#show).
**Win…** Prizes for anyone bringing a Tesla Coil, the best Tesla Coil
and the coolest of the Tesla-inspired devices!!! **Experience…** Visuals
by [**VJ Scotbot**](http://scobot.com/)! The smell of ozone in the
evening! **Dance…** to music by [**CARLOS
MIGUEL**](http://djcarlosdasilva.com/), DjMB and
[**TECHNOISYOURFRIEND**](http://www.technoisyourfriend.com/) **Drink…**
Glow-In-The-Dark cocktails!
