---
author: admin
date: '2005-03-10 23:52:13'
layout: post
slug: lodge-tonight
status: publish
title: Lodge Tonight
wordpress_id: '418'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I attended my first normal lodge meeting as a mason this evening. We are
continuing our lecture series on the seven liberal arts. Tonight, the
guest speaker spoke on logic and Aristotle. He's a philosophy professor
at Seattle Pacific University, where the master of the lodge is also a
professor.

The lecture went fairly well. It was a bit drier than the on on rhetoric
last month and I wonder how much some got out of it but most of the guys
seemed pretty engaged. There was a lively discussion of the examples
used for some of his logical proofs (The Problem of Evil was one). He
was quite into the topic overall, which one would hope for in a visiting
lecturer.

During the closing ritual, I was allowed to fill a minor officer role
because not all of the members had stayed for some of the closing
business. The lodge did me the courtesy of opening in my degree so I
could witness how it was done. I'm going to be working off and on over
the next few weeks to do the things necessary to take the next degree.
It should be a fairly straightforward process.

Leaving, it occurred to me that the kind of fellowship and tradition
that I feel in fraternal settings is a strong antidote to much of the
alienation that I normally feel towards the world. Most of the time, I
feel that I have so little in common with the people that I talk to and
that they have so little interest in me. I also feel disconnected from
much of the culture around me with its focus on superficialities and
consumerism. Being in lodge together addresses a lot of that for me, I
believe. I felt this in the Odd Fellows to some degree as well. Here is
a group of men, most of whom I don't know, who are interested in being,
truly, my brothers and in talking to me as a person. I had some good
conversation this evening. Even the ones that I know that I won't meet
eye to eye with are friendly and warm. Contrast that to much of the
aggression of my work environment with its lack of fraternity outside of
my own team. Also, feeling connected to a four hundred year old
tradition and the language and forms of it allows me to feel a stronger
connection to the history of my own people and culture.

It's nice to feel that sometimes. I spend so much time with the "lunatic
fringe" of occultists, magicians, yogis, sorcerers, and other edge
people (as mainstream as they might feel in other ways) that I feel on
the edges of anything like American culture. The matters of our concern
have been on the periphery for a couple of centuries and it shows at
times in our inability to connect with the ongoing culture. I've often
said that I feel so outside the mainstream at times that I can't even
see it from where I am anymore. (Of course, the amusing bit is that to
many of the fringe types, I'm terribly mundane and normal. It's all a
matter of perspective in the end.)

In any case, it was a good lodge meeting.
