---
author: admin
date: '2005-02-26 23:49:38'
layout: post
slug: this-week-2
status: publish
title: This Week
wordpress_id: '407'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---
<p>I got the grade back for my first paper for my graduate history class (the 
required one for my program). This is the paper that I posted online. In any 
case, I got an &quot;A&quot; and some nice comments from the prof. He didn&#39;t complain that 
I was 3/4 of a page over in length as well. I haven&#39;t heard back from the 
philosophy class but that was a bit shorter of a paper.</p>
<p>I have another very short philosophy paper due by next Friday. I finished the 
reading for it yesterday so I&#39;m going to try to crank out an initial draft 
tomorrow. My history paper did well from having my wife as a proofer so I think 
I&#39;ll continue to try to enlist her aid. Bribes may be required because I&#39;m such 
a cranky bastard about my work.</p>
<p>I haven&#39;t written much this week. Mostly, I&#39;ve felt too tired after work and 
other activities to do so.</p>
<p>Tuesday, <a href="http://www.livejournal.com/users/rubylou/">Rubylou</a> and 
I met for coffee and chit-chat. I hadn&#39;t seen her in a little while and I needed&nbsp; 
to give her the birthday present that R and I had bought for her: a 10&quot; pope 
doll/action figure (ol&#39; GI Joe size). I think she promised to sleep with him but 
I didn&#39;t want to ask too many questions there. She and I hung out for a few 
hours, got some food, and promised to go out again in a few weeks. Rubylou is 
probably one of my best friends in the world at this point (shhh...don&#39;t tell 
her) and one of the people I miss talking to sometimes. </p>
<p>R and I have discussed moving to the Bay Area in a couple of years a few 
times recently. Leaving behind the handful of friends that I&#39;ve had since 
college and my early 20s would definitely be hard for me. Some of them I don&#39;t 
get to see that often but they are amongst the few&nbsp; people that I think 
really know and accept me for who I am. It&#39;s nice to have people for whom you 
don&#39;t need to put your face on. I&#39;m often surprised about how little 
understanding some people that I&#39;ve known for years (often through work) really 
have for things like what I truly care about but it goes both ways. People often 
create such superficial attachments to people or keep people at a distance. It&#39;s 
nice to have someone besides my wife that I feel that I don&#39;t have to shield my 
true thoughts or interests from.</p>
<p>Wednesday was my free evening. I was going to leave work a little early and 
have dinner with R. That didn&#39;t work out so well and I wound up leaving work 
late and wound up. I spent most of the evening just reading my school books and 
chilling.</p>
<p>Thursday was my masonic initiation so I was out the entire evening. </p>
<p>Friday (last night), I didn&#39;t have any plans but since I had to get up early 
today, I didn&#39;t want to go do anything. I mainly puttered around the house a bit 
and inspected it for additions to the siding work that I&#39;m having done in a 
couple of weeks.</p>
<p>Today was my day to go to McNeil Island Correctional Center. I got up at 5:20 
AM, showered, and headed out with my coffee. I got down there about 7:00 AM and 
took the 7:25 AM ferry out. It turns out that I might as well have slept in 
since Puget Sound, for something like 100 miles, was all fogged up. I haven&#39;t 
been out to the island on a foggy day before but the prison shuts down all 
movement outside and near the outer fences when it is foggy. I assume it is 
because the towers can&#39;t see each other. The Chapel is next to the fence so it 
was closed. I found this out once I was on the island. The officer on duty took 
me out and let me hang out. When the fog cleared, everything was supposed to 
open up again. I wound up only waiting about an hour before they let the guys 
out. We had our session and I have a few new guys to deal with, including one 
that seems pretty sketchy on a mental level. He&#39;s obviously smarter and better 
educated than the others but I think he&#39;s heavily medicated, probably for 
control issues or something. I could tell that the guys weren&#39;t too hip on him 
either though they weren&#39;t hostile.</p>
<p>On my way home, I picked up my comics and got the new Grant Morrison title 
and the second issue of the new Grimjack series. I also picked up the 
Disinformation guide for <b>The Invisibles</b> because I&#39;m such a fanboy and I&#39;d 
been wanting it.</p>
<p>Madeline came over about 6:00 and we had a nice family dinner followed by 
watching <b>Laputa: Castle in the Sky</b>, which no one but me had seen before.</p>
