---
author: admin
date: '2005-06-25 20:40:39'
layout: post
slug: saturday-night-in-portland
status: publish
title: Saturday Night in Portland
wordpress_id: '495'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I'm sitting in Powell's in Portland drinking a latte and using their
free wifi. Powell's is about 50 yards from my hotel so it seems to be a
good place to hang out. Unfortunately, I'm being forced to listen to
music very loudly from my Ipod when I'd rather night. There is a nutter
at the next table ranting about how the Cold War didn't happen, how the
Rothchilds (sp?) assassinated Lincoln because of the desire to create
and maintain the Federal Reserve, etc. He's using all of the common
silly debate tricks to twist arguments, create straw men, etc. He's
"debating" with a 20-something (who is suckered by all of this) and a
50-something who looks like he should know better. They've been going at
it for 30 minutes now and I'm tempted to get involved just to shut it
down. I realize that it wouldn't be terribly compassionate to do so and
also that the nut might decide to focus on me instead so I'm resisting
the urge. I do wish he'd shut up so I could turn my music off. Everyone
else in the room is gradually moving further away... :-) I had a nice
dinner at Jake's Grill but decided I'd rather be out for the evening
than hanging out in my hotel room. The teachings have been going well.
All the detail about ngondro that you could ever want but from a Bon
perspective. It's been fun and Rinpoche is a good teacher. His English
is noticeably improving over time so he has no need of a translator
anymore. I'll be retaking my refuge vows tomorrow. I did pick up some
books as well (surprise!). R and I had a $50 gift card for Powell's from
friends as a wedding gift. I spent $50.78 last night without doing the
math on my own so it was a good sign. I bought two John Shirley novels,
**Crawlers** and **City Come A-Walkin'**, a book on Kashmir Shaivite
philosophy, a book by Eva Wong on some Taoist contemplative practices
(I've been reading some of her stuff lately), and a book on Masonic
origins from the set of ones that Aquarian published back in the late
80s. I should be back in Seattle by tomorrow evening at some point.
