---
author: admin
date: '2005-04-01 23:34:54'
layout: post
slug: questions-questions
status: publish
title: Questions, Questions...
wordpress_id: '436'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Do you ever look at the life you lead and wonder how you got here? Do
you think about the person that you once were and wonder who that person
was? While an abstract thought, I mean it literally.

I sometimes look at the person I once was and I realize that I don't
really know that person anymore. That person probably didn't even know
himself anyway so he is, in a sense, unknown. I can see the kernel of
who I am now in that earlier version of me. I can see the tendencies
that have developed or atrophied in my current state but self-awareness,
at least at my age and I hope forever, seems to be an ever unfolding
event.

This is important because I think that many people, consciously or
unconsciously, are trapped by either their previous conceptions of
themselves and their identities or just by the limitations that they set
on themselves at earlier junctures. They might have been reasonable at
the time or they may have been the naivity of youth. It is really hard
to say and it doesn't matter.

You are always free. You can always recreate who you are. No sin cannot
be undone, even if their is a price to be paid for all actions...call it
karma or just results but you aren't imprisoned by these things. Sure,
habits are extremely hardy weeds and they'll grow out of the cracks when
you're looking elsewhere. You'll find yourself doing the same old things
but you have a choice.

Much of what we are is set when we are children. Our basic attitudes
towards life, much of our way of relating to others. It is realistic to
say that these cannot really be changed. That is true but I do believe
that awareness and insight are great keys to opening doors. No, you may
not change who you fundamentally are, in certain ways, but awareness
gives you choices. Besides, who are you really?

Are you a collection of habits, good or bad? Are you a conception of
self that you formulated when you were a teenager. Do you still have to
hate society and where black because that is "who you are" (or do you
still have to love society and be a team player if you realize that
there is emptiness there as well)?

There is no you but there are the knots in our beings, whether it be
mind, soul, or something else, that we are somehow clustered in. You can
untie the knots and set free...nothing? They aren't really tied around
anything but your own conceptions and attachments. If you untie them,
you will be free.

What does being free really mean? I don't know. I'd like to find out but
I must admit, candidly and honestly, that it makes me afraid. The knots
are comforting even when they are around your neck. Better the Devil
that you know, eh? I'm not a freewheelin' soul ready to take risks and
dare all but I need to be one, in the end.

As I have said before, there is a flaw that runs through the heart of
the world and it is shaped like yourself. Unless you are profoundly
lucky (or perhaps it is unlucky), you can feel it at least sometimes.
**The Matrix** stuck a chord with people when it came out because people
could empathize with much of what was being said. As Morpheus says,

> "You're here because you know something. What you know you can't
> explain, but you feel it. You've felt it your entire life, that
> there's something wrong with the world. You don't know what it is, but
> it's there, like a splinter in your mind, driving you mad."

All of this feeds into my desire for change. While the grass is not
always greener, it is a different patch of grass and I do believe that
life is movement, as tantra teaches. Stability is stagnation and I've
been stable for most of eight years now. I know a change will come and I
hope that I have the courage to make it happen, embrace it and move
forward with my life and to not shirk away, choosing the easy way out.
If I do, I fear I'll wind up old, fat, and worn out. Just another
fucking corporate drone that made some asshole all the richer. Sure,
I'll get my pound of flesh too, perhaps, but the *flaw* will still be
there, aching, in my heart.
