---
author: admin
date: '2005-08-11 23:36:12'
layout: post
slug: school-news
status: publish
title: School News
wordpress_id: '524'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---

I received my copy of my final **World Religions** paper yesterday. I
must say that it, literally, looked like it had been inside that UPS
package from the opening of **Ace Ventura** (for those that remember
that one). All folded up on itself, wrinkled with about 10% of the
bibliography page ripped away. I think there was some rubber cement
stuck to it too (I hope).

I received an 'A' and actually had the amusement value, while reading my
prof's spider-like handwriting, of him make a comments in reference to
Christian Fundamentalists bombing abortion clinics and killing doctors
that I, personally, make about two pages after he mentioned it. I've
noticed that he doesn't read the paper once or twice before writing his
comments but does them as he goes, sometimes correcting himself when you
make the point he thought was missing.

This means my final grade for the class is an 'A'. I received the grade
for my third literature paper a week ago. This was also an 'A' though he
commented on how my paper didn't actually focus on the topic of
**Self**, which is part of the supposed theme that I was supposed to
find a thesis on. He liked the paper in every way, otherwise, and found
it original enough to give me a good grade. Compare this my first paper,
where I got an 'AB' (3.66) because while I focused entirely on the topic
that he wanted and it was well written, my thesis choice wasn't terribly
original. What lesson do I learn from this? Style, originality, and the
craft of riding will win out over actually doing the assignment as
assigned. I wonder if this applies to other classes?

Tonight, I turned in my final literature paper (on the prison of
Solness' guilt in Henrik Ibsen's **The Master Builder**). This finishes
my literature (thank you, gods of earth and starry heaven). I'd actually
managed to avoid Ibsen entirely during my undergraduate days so I didn't
mind getting a chance to read him.

I have a week until my "Fall" semester starts. I'm more concerned about
this one because the subject matter and paper requirements seem a bit
more difficult. On the plus side, I get to read Thomas Paine, John
Stuart Mill, Dostoevsky, Virginia Wolfe, and B.F. Skinner, among others.
At least the reading won't be boring.

After this Fall's term, I only have "Spring" (which starts in winter, go
figure) and one class next Summer. After that, it is my
as-yet-undetermined thesis.

This is my lineup for Fall, Spring and next Summer.

**Fall**

-   [HUX 542 - The Para-Rational
    Perspective](http://www.csudh.edu/hux/syllabi/542/default.htm)
    (Fall, 2005) - Applied to Philosophy with permission from Dr.
    Jeffers.
-   [HUX 544 - The Individual and
    Society](http://www.csudh.edu/hux/syllabi/544/default.htm) (Fall,
    2005)

**Spring**

-   [HUX 557 - Key Periods and Movements, Philosophy: Greeks:
    Philosophy, Tragedy and the
    Polis](http://www.csudh.edu/hux/syllabi/557/default.htm) (Spring,
    2006)
-   HUX 594c - Independent Study (Spring, 2006) **- probably on Western
    Esotericism**

**Summer, 2006**

-   [HUX 581 - Key Periods and Movements, Philosophy: Philosophy and
    Postmodernism](http://www.csudh.edu/hux/syllabi/581/default.htm)
    (Summer, 2006)

