---
author: admin
date: '2005-02-14 21:46:13'
layout: post
slug: gnomes
status: publish
title: Gnomes!
wordpress_id: '398'
categories:
- Humor
---
<p>The gnome threat is real! I told you!!!</p>
<p><a href="http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/1/hi/england/cumbria/4263761.stm">
http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/1/hi/england/cumbria/4263761.stm</a> </p>
	<h2>Underwater gnome threat 'returns' </h2>
	<p><b>A secret underwater attraction that lured several divers to their 
	deaths could have returned, police say. </b></p>
	<p>The &quot;gnome garden&quot; complete with picket fence was removed from the bottom 
	of Wastwater in the Lake District after several divers died a few years ago.
	</p>
	<p>It is thought they spent too much time at too great a depth while 
	searching for the site of the ornaments. </p>
	<p>Now police divers say there is a rumour that the garden has returned at a 
	depth beyond which they are allowed. </p>
	<p>Pc Kenny McMahon, a member of the North West Police Underwater Search 
	Unit, said the gnomes were well known among the diving community. </p>
	<p><b>Dive limit </b></p>
	<p>He said: &quot;Wastwater is quite clear at the bottom, but there's nothing to 
	see. At a depth of about 48m, divers had taken gnomes down and put a picket 
	fence around them. </p>
	<p>&quot;But several years ago there were a number of fatalities and the Lake 
	District National Park Authority asked us to get rid of them. </p>
	<p>&quot;We went down there, put them in bags and removed the lot. </p>
	<p>&quot;But now there's a rumour about a new garden beyond the 50m depth limit.
	</p>
	<p>&quot;As police divers we can't legally dive any deeper so, if it exists, the 
	new garden could have been purposefully put out of our reach.&quot; </p>
	<p><b>'Extra pressure' </b></p>
	<p>Wastwater is three miles long, half a mile wide and about 80m deep, the 
	deepest in the Lake District. </p>
	<p>Dave Dresser, from the Sub-Aqua Association, said different associations 
	had different depth limits but theirs was 50m for air divers, and that was 
	only for very experienced divers. </p>
	<p>He said technical divers, who used a mixture of gases, could go below 
	that depth. </p>
	<p>He said: &quot;You have got to be experienced to go below that sort of depth, 
	especially in Wastwater. </p>
	<p>&quot;It's a very risky thing. In Wastwater, the water is very cold, which 
	puts a lot of extra pressure on your body. It is very clear water which 
	gives you a false sense of security.&quot;</p>
