---
author: admin
date: '2005-10-08 23:57:53'
layout: post
slug: portable-divx-player
status: publish
title: Portable DivX Player
wordpress_id: '568'
categories:
- Technology
---

While in Bangkok, I did pay a visit to Panthip Plaza (see
[here](http://www.bangkokbob.net/pantip.html) and
[here](http://www.into-asia.com/bangkok/shopping/pantip.php)). This is
one of the electronics/software meccas there. It is seven floors of flea
market-esque stalls packed next to each other with an amazing horde of
people circulating around them. I saw everything from standard beige box
computer components, name brand laptops and other electronics, no name
electronics, pirated and legit software (including seeing the 'X86' OS X
test version that was recently pirated sitting in a window display with
a seeming professional package), and pirated music and DVDs. The pirated
media items especially prevalent on the first couple of floors. R was
there with me and whenever she would be more than five or so feet away
on those floors, Thai guys would start asking me if I wanted "sexy
movie" DVDs and holding out papers that I assume were their sample
catalogs. As soon as R came near me, suddenly the guys were quiet and
didn't say a word. Gender issues are funny in Thailand at times (she
found it amusing). Everything had slick and professional looking
packaging. I wasn't particularly looking for pirated media or software.
What I was looking for was a portable video player similar to what Cory
Doctorow found in Singapore recently. I didn't find the same thing that
he found (which was one that took compact flash and other media and
played movies on them). What I did find was a hard drive enclosure DivX
player. You put a 2.5 inch laptop hard drive in it and transfer files to
it from your PC like you would any other portable hard drive. (It has a
USB 2.0 connector.) Once the files are on it, it can play DivX or other
common video formats via either a VGA out connector to a monitor or
video/audio cable connector. It has control buttons on the top of the
device plus it has built-in infrared support and comes with a remote
control. Searching the box it came in, the device itself, and the
manual, I could not find a manufacturer for it. It is a "no name" device
but the shop that had them had many of them. Looking around a bit in the
plaza, I only found the one shop with them so it doesn't seem to be
common. The device cost, if I recall, 3,700 baht, which is roughly $90
US. You have to supply your own hard drive for it though. Since I just
got back yesterday, I haven't gone and gotten a hard drive for it yet in
order to try it out. I'll let people know how well it works when I do.
Here are pictures that I took of the player and the main manual page:

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/divx-box.jpg)

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/divx-box-contents.jpg)

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/divx-player.jpg)

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/divx-player-closeup.jpg)

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/divx-manual.jpg)
