---
author: admin
date: '2005-08-12 00:27:10'
layout: post
slug: high-school
status: publish
title: High School
wordpress_id: '526'
categories:
- Humor
---

You know, I am a high school dropout. I never attended my senior year. I
skipped it and went straight to community college.

This was about five years before their 'high school completion' programs
were created and standardized. I had a friend (acquaintance really) that
had gotten himself thrown out of Seattle Prep, gone to my high school
for a year, and then dropped out and went to community college. When I
saw him do that, a year before me, I thought something along the lines
of "Shee-it!"

Given how utterly bored and unchallenged I was in high school, it seemed
a good idea. My grades sucked and I went to two different high schools
in three years so I wasn't on the "going to the big university" plan
anyway. By going to community college, I got to skip out on the waste
that my senior year would have been, get my Associate degree and then
direct transfer to the University of Washington, which I did.

To this day, I still have no idea, looking back, at how I managed to
talk my grandparents into letting me do this but we actually went to my
school counselor and told them that I was leaving. We got a note from
them before I went to NSCC. I don't recall how I got into the school but
I must assume that entrance requirements were relatively low (not
requiring high school graduation, obviously). I do recall having to take
placement exams for English, Math, etc. to avoid sub-100 level classes.

Needless to say, when people talk about their High School experiences or
about reunions, I have a hard time really relating. I didn't really
bloom until college. That's when I discovered Metallica, Nine Inch
Nails, Frontline Assembly, Ministry and a host of other music. It's also
when I discovered drinking and actually managing to have girlfriends.

To be truthful, I was always a late bloomer. In most social interaction
ways, I'm probably emotionally five or so years younger than my
chronological age. I was always behind the curve and it gets more clear
as I get older how behind the curve I really was in my ability to deal
with other people, to be self-aware, and generally get along. Perhaps
that explains why my first marriage at age 23 wasn't a good idea.

On the school front, the real kicker was that the University of
Washington made me go get a GED and take SATs in order to *qualify* to
*apply* to their programs. The fact that I had a two year degree of the
requisite GPA meant that I was automatically accepted into their school
but they wouldn't let me apply without those things. Fuckers. The GED is
three hours of my life that I will never get back. The SATs were amusing
but more because I got 1480 (out of 1600, the old style). What did they
expect someone with two years of college to get?

Anyway...
