---
author: admin
date: '2005-06-05 11:35:53'
layout: post
slug: return-to-the-dime-museum
status: publish
title: Return to the Dime Museum
wordpress_id: '474'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

![image](http://www.arcanology.com/images/pyramid.jpg)On Friday night, R
and I went with Denny Sargent and Sophia to see the opening night of
[Circus Contraption](http://www.circuscontraption.com/home.html)'s new
show, **Return to the Dime Museum**. Circus Contraption is a local, one
ring circus that was, I believe, originally started as a hobby by a
group of people interested in performing about six years ago. We've been
going annually for a few years and know one of the performers. Circus
Contraption is known for its inappropriate sick humor, for rather adult
jokes and just, all-around, being the kind of place that would give most
Republicans nightmares about the death of American family values or the
like. In other words, it is the kind of thing that most of my friends
would love. As the first night of the new show, it was a "Pay What You
Can" night. I paid the full, normal, $20 price because I wanted to help
them out. The guy in front of me (who was one of the first in line) paid
a whole dollar. That was an amusing exchange to watch: Guy: "I only have
a dollar. I thought I had more but that's all that was in my pocket."
Ticket Lady: "Normally, we request a minimum of $5." Guy: "But it's 'Pay
What You Can', right? Well, I have a dollar." Ticket Lady: "There is an
ATM a block away if you want to get cash." Guy: "I'm paying a dollar."
(This all took place about 40 minutes **before** they were going to let
us in to sit so the guy had lots of time...) As he walks away and the
next people come up, the Ticket Lady told the next people that they
could pay what they wanted "Just like Mr. Dollar over there." People
proceeded to quietly and discuss the fellow, who looked like a wild
hermit type (not a street person) that you'd avoid on the bus. Later, R
enjoyed seeing him brushing his teeth upstairs at the sink near the
bathroom. Eventually, he went away and came back and seemed to give them
some loose change (dimes and quarters) or something. During the show,
the MC was doing a vaudeville patter on stage and said "...and you can
pay what you like for this show. In fact, one man paid an entire dollar
to see the show. Let me tell you buddy, you're going to get your money's
worth tonight!" to much laughter. Of course, the fellow was sitting
right behind us so I didn't get a chance to see the expression on his
face but I bet it was priceless. Moral of the story: Don't fuck with
Carnies when they want you to pay up. They'll get it in money or
mockery, one way or the other. As to the show, it was great. I don't
think I've grinned so much or laughed so hard for so long this year.
Seriously. My personal high point was the part where we were looking
into your typical freak shop with a Fijian Mermaid and such and Dr.
Calimari pulls the cover off of the table to reveal...three head-sized
preserved embryos in large jars (obviously fake looking). These proceed
to bounce up and down as simple puppets. While we were laughing at this,
the song number begins with the three of them singing (in harmony) about
how they want their mummy and wish that they had arms to hug with... I
tell you, I can't do it justice. There were many excellent acts of
songs, dance, trapeze, lewd humor, bicycle races, and many others. They
all flowed together out of this 19th century theme and the cast was just
wonderful. I encourage everyone to go. As they said, "Tell your family!
Tell your friends! Hell, tell people you hate! They should all come give
us their money!" An enjoyable show.
