--- 
wordpress_id: 492
layout: post
title: Green Homes
date: 2005-06-22 23:01:24
wordpress_url: http://www.arcanology.com/?p=492
---
I found this Green Homes site tonight: 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <a href="http://www.greenhomesforsale.com">http://www.greenhomesforsale.com</a>. I'm lusting after this one even though I haven't lived in warm climates for 20 years now: <blockquote>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <strong>El Prado, New Mexico Off-the-grid home - Passive Solar - Photovoltaic Solar - Zoned radiant floor heat. Trace inverters. 44 acres and two wells.</strong> <strong>Sale Price: $1,100,000</strong> Home Description:This off-the-grid home was conceived by two retired architects and built by local contractor. The open nature of the home is a prerequisite for the positive passive solar experience. Unlike average homes with floor to ceiling walls and forced air systems, this home is totally warmed and cooled passively; there is no heat or air conditioning. The fairly constant 70 degrees is accomplished by having the open air circulation afforded by no full height walls. The heat during the day in the winter and the cool nights in the summer contribute to the comfort of the interior spaces. The Rumford fireplace was built by local fireplace expert who understood this to be the primary heat source of the home. The home is zoned with radiant floor heat, which has not been necessary for the 7 years the owners have lived here. The home does require the owner to be an active participant and be aware of the weather conditions ventilating, or closing windows or awnings as the case arises. Wood and propane are the primary purchases in the heating of the home. There is a wind generator which can be used if needed for additional power. It does have an on/off switch for use as desired. The two Trace inverters maintain the homes power and water needs. The computers in the inverters speak to the home as needed. They invert the solar DC power into AC power for household appliances and power usage. There is no DC power used in the house. This allows the owner to purchase the most efficient appliances on the market. The well associated with the house is at 640 feet with a head pressure at 500 feet. There is a 1000 gallon cistern (or holding tank)which has a float valve that regulates the water level. When the float determines the necessity of water, the inverters are triggered and they turn on the generator, which cycles for 60 seconds before turning on the 3 horsepower pump which then fills the cistern. When complete the system turns off the pump and the generator. The same holds true for the batteries. When the power gets below a certain level the inverters turn on the generator to top off the batteries. The batteries are kept hydrated by a gravity demand sys! tem. All of this is seamless. Like any machine however, this house would appreciate an owner with some interest in learning its vital signs and having the desire and understanding of how to trouble shoot potential problems. It does take someone interested in positive maintenance programs. The pole adjacent to the tower consists of a booster antenna for phone reception, lightening suppressors and broadband repeater station maintained by Taos Net. This system gives the owner a wireless connection to the internet for 4 computers. There is a satellite dish for Dish TV on the roof. The house consists of an open concept of two bedrooms and two baths with a living space of approximately 2100 sq.ft, a studio with a loft around 900 sq.ft, a shop with 220 V and 110 V power at about 750 sq.ft and a partially buried storage container around 150 sq.ft. This container currently houses 5 motorcycles and gear on built-in storage shelves and has power for lights and chargers. The ceilings in the living portion of the house are approximately 13/15 ft high, with the bedrooms at about 10/12 ft. The entry tower is designed from a Mediterranean wind tower. Its baffle can be manually opened and closed according to the needs of the house. In the winter it closes so the cold winds do not penetrate, and in the summer it is opened to draw cooler air through the house. It contains a misting system which comes on automatically (after being manually turned on in the summer) to keep the air cool. The roof top deck and “garden” mimics the feeling given by the surrounding high desert. The landscaping is all xeriscape so that watering is not necessary. There is an irrigation system installed since in the first few years of planting it was necessary to water the plants, however over time that is no longer necessary unless there is a major drought. The interior planters are manually watered except in the studio which is on a drip system.The hot tub is a cedar 6 ft. round 3 ft deep tub without jets or any noise producing elements. The quiet of the night is much too sacred when watching the stars and hearing the water rushing in the gorge ¾ of a mile from the house and 650 feet down. The hot tub is heated by convection with a Japanese propane heater. No chemicals are used in the tub and it should be cleaned out every 3-5 weeks. The water from the tub is used on the trees. There are two decorative ponds with 1500 and 3000 gallon tanks that provide back-up for any emergency needs. These collect rainwater and the water from the roof. One pond has a solar panel which runs the waterfall during the summer months. The sprayed on hard foam roof gives the house about an R-50 value. The walls on the north are foam block filled with concrete as are the walls under the windows on the remaining structure. The windows are double paned except for the studio and the door in the hallway to the studio. The interior walls are built with bottles and cans which contribute to the insulative conditions of the passive system. The studio and shop are full quonset hut structures and the main portion of the living space in the house is a partial quonset. There are 44 acres available with this property and two wells. The second well is on the 10 acres north of the home site. The acreage maintains the pristine views. The house and 34 acres sit on the edge of the Scenic Gorge right-of-way which is owned by the Bureau of Land Management and will not be built on. The land across the gorge is Pueblo land and should not change in this lifetime. The additional 10 acres is west of the house, maintaining the current views. The view to the south is guaranteed since the property goes to the edge of the adjoining earthship. Beyond the earthship the land is owned by the state. There is a public access road which runs through the property to the gorge near the earthship to the south.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      </blockquote> There is a lot more technical data on the site on the systems in the home.