---
author: admin
date: '2005-11-05 23:34:30'
layout: post
slug: new-alan-moore-interview
status: publish
title: New Alan Moore Interview
wordpress_id: '586'
categories:
- Notable People
---

From
[http://enjoyment.independent.co.uk/books/interviews/article324487.ece](http://enjoyment.independent.co.uk/books/interviews/article324487.ece)

## Alan Moore: Could it be magic?

### Hollywood may love Alan Moore, but the cult graphic novelist sets
his artistic sights higher. Roz Kaveney talks to him about Kabbala,
comics and consciousness

#### Published: 04 November 2005

Northampton is one of those towns in the heart of England, up the line
from Berkhamsted and Milton Keynes, that seem ordinary until you know
their history. The first Parliament was declared here, and the
neighbourhood was the location of crucial battles in both the Wars of
the Roses and the Civil War. It is the sort of quiet, extraordinary
place where the flowing hair and beard of Alan Moore pass unremarked. He
has always lived there, and they don't notice him any more.

Moore has changed the face of graphic novels, so that we hardly talk
about "comics" any more, but that, luckily, does not make him a
celebrity. "It means nothing if a million people know your name," he
says. "I didn't sign up for that." One of the many themes which have
permeated his work since he first started to be noticed for his issues
of DC Comics *Swamp Thing* in the early 1980s is his distaste for the
way the mass media turn sometimes quite ordinary people into
celebrities, "fuel rods for the Murdoch empire", then spit them out as
drug-addicted or merely boring, only to rediscover them years later as
ironic icons. The work is what is important: if Moore's name is
something that the industry uses to shift product, that is because
*Watchmen*, *V for Vendetta*, *From Hell*, *The League of Extraordinary
Gentlemen* and all the rest are outstanding, inventive pieces of work.

His house is just one of a long brick terrace; inside, it is blue and
starry. His bath is on a Hollywood scale: a friend who works in
fibre-glass got on the wrong side of the local heavies, and Moore
settled his debt and took it out in trade. This is the house of a
working writer; cases of editions of his work litter the office floor.
It is also the home of a working magician, decorated with ritual wands
from the Golden Dawn, falcon masks and the haunting art of the occultist
Austin Osman Spare. This makes for an appropriately strange setting for
the recluse whom Iain Sinclair has described as "the last sane man in
England".

"Magic and Art are the same," he affirms. "Which is why Magic is
referred to as The Great Art. They are both technologies of Will, both
about pulling rabbits out of hats and creating something where there was
nothing." Moore and the artist J H Williams have just published the
fifth and final volume of *Promethea*(America's Best Comics/Titan,
Â£24.99), which is partly a superhero comic about a young woman coming
into mystic power at the end of the second millennium, and partly a
course of instruction in magic and the occult. It is funny and exciting,
and somehow you don't feel quite the same after reading it; it's a book
that leaves you with a sense of the connectedness of things. A
bestselling piece of commercial art, *Promethea* is also as much Moore's
grimoire as the two CDs of his ritual performances, *The Highbury
Working* and *Snakes and Ladders*.

"Books of magic are always written in high metaphor," he explains. "They
are about our relationship to consciousness and how we construe it."
Consciousness is the hole in rationalism. You cannot reproduce it in a
laboratory, which is why some rationalist philosophers like Dan Dennett
try to deny the shared experience of knowing that there is a "how" to
how we feel. For Moore, magic is a way of breaking the paradigm, of
making sense of our lives as we live them.

He is distrustful of many things about magic and the occult: "When I
talk about Kabbala, it is a coherent system for organising our
understanding of things and the connections between them, not wearing a
red string on your wrist or drinking expensive bottled water." One of
the most beautiful sections of *Promethea* is a prolonged wander through
the Sephirothim, the realms of reality described by the Kabbala, which
are cognate with the planets of non-predictive astrology and with the
effects of colour on our moods. Thus, one issue is largely green and
discusses that oceanic feeling of belonging and being nurtured that is
associated with Venus; it is also Williams's tribute to the swirly
softness of Alphonse Mucha and much Underground art of the 1960s.

*Promethea* was also about setting himself and Williams challenges.
After the episode in which they had presented the history of the world
as a tarot deck, it had to be a matter of ever-escalating virtuoso
explorations of different styles of comics and of occult art. The last
issue, for example, in which everything we have learned about magic is
recapitulated, is designed both page by page, and to fold out as two
large posters of Promethea.

"One of the problems with the occult is the vested interest of most
occultists in obfuscation," says Moore. "They sell the possibilities of
magic short and lose touch with reality." In *Promethea*, partly because
it is also a high-octane story about the misunderstood Sophie Bangs
(whom the FBI are chasing for fear that she will destroy the world),
Moore is free to talk more or less clearly about what, for example, the
end of the world means. As Promethea, Sophie does, in a sense, end the
world; she makes everyone see things in a new light: "It was always
going to be a book about Apocalypse. Then issue 17, which had as its
teaser for the next issue Panic in Manhattan, Hell on Earth, appeared in
mid- September 2001."

*Promethea* is only one, though perhaps the most interesting, of the
projects Moore has been doing for his imprint America's Best Comics.
There is *Tom Strong*, with its deliberate evocation of a more innocent
era of chunky, brilliant heroes who make peace with menaces as often as
they fight them. There is *The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen*, a
piece of cynical Victoriana in which Alan Quartermain, Mina Harker,
Captain Nemo, Mr Hyde and the Invisible Man join forces against Chinese
warlords and Martian invaders, and there is the sardonic anthology
series, *Terrific Tales*.

My personal favourite is *Top Ten* and its just-published prequel *The
49ers*, which are smart, humane and funny, but also a nuanced meditation
on the "heroic" part of the concept of the superhero. They are,
effectively, a version of *The Bill* or *Hill Street Blues* set in
Neopolis, where everyone is a superhero, a robot, a vampire or a god. "I
had been thinking about why superhero team-up comics almost never work,"
says Moore, "and I think it is because you have to set your team against
ever-escalating menaces. And I had been thinking about the ensemble in
cop shows."

This is, quite possibly, one of Alan Moore's swansongs in the
traditional comics industry. Gerald Jonas in his book *Men of Tomorrow*
documented the way that the creators of comics' most enduring icons -
Superman and Batman - were cheated by businessmen who had a more than
passing association with the Mafia. Things may have changed, but not
enough. "Proper grown-up writers have a moral right to their work - it
says so right there on the page," says Moore.

Specifically, he hates the way that many of his colleagues get excited
when a wonderful comic book gets turned into a worthless movie
franchise. He is in the process of severing his links with DC as a
result of a press release which said that he was enthusiastic about the
forthcoming film of *V for Vendetta*. On the contrary, "I have made it
clear that I want nothing to do with films of my work. I don't want my
name on them and I insist that the money go to other creators."

In 2006, Moore and his partner Melinda Gebbie will be publishing *Lost
Girls*, a graphic novel that explores the erotic and the pornographic;
it is startling and innovative, and the artwork is quite remarkably
beautiful.

In the summer of 1914, at a spa in Austria, three women of varying ages
meet, and talk about their sexual awakenings. Since the three women in
question are Alice, Wendy and Dorothy - the protagonists of three of the
most metaphor-rich children's books of literary history - their
conversations stray into some weird and wonderful territory. "Why can't
a pornographic graphic novel be as fine as anything in the field, and
still be sexy?" Moore asks. For all his disillusion with the actual
industry, Alan Moore is as in love as ever with the wonderful
possibilities of hybrid comics to do things that no other art form can
manage.

**Biography**

Alan Moore was born in 1953 in Northampton, where he still lives. In the
1970s he co-founded an underground magazine, *Embryo*. He came to
prominence as a comics writer with the dystopian *V for Vendetta*
(1982). Working for DC Comics in the 1980s, he created *Swamp Thing* and
*Watchmen*. In 1988, *Watchmen* became the first graphic work to win a
Hugo science-fiction award. He also contributed influential new stories
for *Batman* and *Superman*. After 1988, Moore worked for small
companies, producing graphic novels such as *From Hell*. Moore now has
his own imprint, America's Best Comics, a vehicle for series such as
*The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen* and *Promethea*, the final
volume of which has just appeared. Adaptations of his work include the
films of *From Hell* and *The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen*, with a
film of *V for Vendetta* due next year. In 2006, Moore and his partner,
Melinda Gebbie, will publish their erotic graphic novel, *Lost Girls*.
