---
author: admin
date: '2005-06-19 23:42:13'
layout: post
slug: take-that-denny
status: publish
title: Take That, Denny!
wordpress_id: '488'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

My friend Denny was mocking me this evening. It was his wife, Sophia's,
birthday party. R and I went over in late afternoon to attend for a
while. I'd already spent the morning and most of the day with my
daughter since it is Father's Day. The problem that I have is that I
have two papers, one for each class, due this Friday, the 24th.

It's a major pain when the paper dates line up for classes because I
can't just focus on one. (Sort of like life, I suppose.) The real
wrinkle is that I'm driving a state over on Friday afternoon to attend
teachings from a Bon Lama that I know. I attended teachings with him
last year and I have been wanting to maintain the connection. This means
that I don't have time on Friday to work on the papers.

One of the papers is to be turned in by e-mail and I can do it up until
Midnight on Friday. That means that, being the deadline guy that I am, I
might work more on it on Friday. (Though, historically, I turn in the
e-mail papers a day or two early). The other paper has to be mailed
physically to the professor. Normally, he's not a stickler for dates as
long as he gets them in the right general time. He doesn't care if it is
a day or two (or week) late normally. I've never been late but I know
other students of his. The issue there is that he's given all of us an
alternate address because he's attending his daughter's wedding and
(presumably) staying with her. We have to send them to him there. Since
we don't know when he's leaving, we probably need to get them in on
time... This means that I need to mail the paper by Wednesday, early
evening, at the latest.

Needless to say, I wanted to get some work done on my papers this
weekend. With people over yesterday for the ritual work that my friend
was teaching, the whole afternoon and early evening were a washout for
school work. For late evening, I read scholastic criticisms and
commentaries on **Sula**, which my literature paper is using. So,
marginally useful but I get nervous the longer that I go without any
sort of rough draft. I tend to write by doing. I'm not a big outliner
ahead of time. I get in my groove and just write.

When we were at the birthday party, I didn't want to stay forever (or
drink a lot like others) because I knew I needed to get these papers
done and I needed to work on them tonight. Denny gave me crap when we
decided to leave ("Another hour won't kill you!" "I've got papers to
grade tonight too" and things like that). We forcibly extracted
ourselves anyway and came home.

I am happy to report that in the last four hours (with probably three
hours or so hours of work in that), I wrote nine and a half pages of
draft for my World Religions paper. This is for an eight to ten page
paper. The prof actually doesn't care if you go long if it is
interesting but I do need to cut it down some. I haven't written my
concluding page or so that ties things together but my overview (very
high level) of the Three Ways of Salvation and the Four Permissible
Goals in Hinduism contrasting these with the philosophy and way of the
Buddha (which derived from these to a great extent as a cultural matrix)
is done. I'll spend tomorrow night finishing the last section and then
going over the whole thing repeatedly to clean it up.

Hopefully, R will proofread it for me then and I'll clean it up. If I'm
lucky, I can mail it by Tuesday evening and be done with it. That will
just leave the literature paper. That one has an out in that we have
four papers (this is \#2) and we're allowed to be a week late with one
paper without penalty. If I can't get it done before I leave town (or in
the hotel that night on Friday), I'll e-mail the prof and tell him that
it will be my late one. I want to avoid that because you always like to
keep a wild card in your hand for the future.
