---
author: admin
date: '2005-05-20 01:44:36'
layout: post
slug: fathers
status: publish
title: Fathers
wordpress_id: '464'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Thinking tonight, I never really had a father.

I mean, sure, I have one. We all do. Mine has never, essentially, been
in my life.

My parents divorced when I was a baby. I actually don't even know how
old I was but I'm pretty sure I wasn't even two yet. I might not even
have been one though it seems unlikely.

My father stole me away a few years later. His dad had done it to him
after my grandparents divorced and grampa had gotten away with it, it
seems. My dad tried this trick. He didn't get away with it. The cops
found him in Vegas, where his dad was living after my mom's dad tracked
him down with a PI. After that, my dad got to visit me for a while at a
police station while the cops watched.

I don't remember any of this. It all comes from telling much later on.
What I remember is seeing my dad every other weekend when I was a kid
until I was about seven and he moved to Ellensburg to attend the
university there. Then I saw him once a month (I think). I'd be packed
on a bus and sent over.

These are all relatively good memories. I remember hanging out with my
dad, driving around in his convertible, playing with my aunt, who wasn't
a decade older than me. Nothing super special but something. I do
remember my dad being a hardass. He'd put me to work picking up garbage
on the lawn of his house. He'd make me clean my plate no matter how
nasty the food was. Actually, I remember doing a lot of chores with him.

When I was nine, my mom, stepdad, baby brother and I moved to Utah. For
the next couple of years, I saw my dad in the summer for a month or so.
Still some connection but he became a much more distant figure in my
life and he hadn't really been that close in many ways anyway.

When I was about twelve, my parents had a fight over stupid shit. As a
result, they quit talking and I quit seeing my dad, who still lived in
Seattle. I didn't see him again until I was 18.

All through those joyous teenage years, I didn't have a dad. I had a
stepdad that I hated and I had my mom. When I was 14, I moved back to
Seattle with my mom briefly and, when she went back to Utah, I stayed
with her parents. I stayed with them until I was 22.

Until I was 18, my dad thought that I was still in Utah. No one told him
that I'd come back and I certainly had no idea of how to reach him.

When we tried to reconnect at 18, it was broken. Sure, he was my dad. He
was the guy that I'd spent weekends with as a kid with his biker pals,
shooting pool and drinking beer, working on cars. But...I hadn't seen
him for six years and the six years were when I went from being a kid to
being something more like a man.

We spent time together. We did a spring break weekend in Vancouver, B.C.
when I was 19 or so but...we just didn't relate. I know it goes both
ways too. Family is important to him and there isn't anything that he
won't do for family but he's never known what to do with me.

I used to borrow money from him like I was entitled to it and he
resented it. I resented him and I wasn't self-aware enough to really
know why. Here's this guy, he's supposed to be my **father** and what is
he really? I can't tell you. Eventually, he and I had a few frank
conversations and things got clearer between us but he's still the guy
who I have dinner with when he comes to town and that's it. The next
time that he comes will be the first time he's ever even stayed at my
house.

In so many ways, I'm the son of my mother's family except...I'm not one
of them either. I'm a Billings, not a Beals (no matter how much I wished
I was one when I was a teen). I have my father's temper, his sarcasm,
even his intelligence. It also turns out, I have his depression and
anxiety to some extent as well. Problems that I had later that seemed
unique in my family were only unique in my mother's family.

Most people don't know this because I haven't mentioned it too much.
Most people also don't know that my father is terminal as well. His
liver is failing him and he'll only be alive in a year or two if he gets
another, either a living transplant or a full one.

So, I'm 34 for this year. I can't pretend to be a 20-something. I'm an
adult now and have been for quite a while. I'm also someone who was
raised as a latchkey kid and then spent his teenage years with his
grandparents. Most of that time with them was spent hiding my spiritual
beliefs, any drinking or sexual activity and otherwise maintaining the
facade of a good grandson. Not a lot of openness there.

A lot of the time, I feel like the person that I am today is the person
that I created (except I wasn't trying, it just happened). Do I really
have a dad or do I have this guy that I know less well than my closest
friends? He certainly didn't raise me though he did impart a few of his
values. It's just that most of them have to do with keeping your word or
winning a fight.

I'd like to end this on a nice conclusion but I don't have one. I do
sometimes worry about my daughter about whether she'll have the same
feelings in 25 years. I dunno.
