---
author: admin
date: '2005-04-16 22:13:15'
layout: post
slug: current-life-and-finishing-the-term
status: publish
title: Current Life and Finishing the Term
wordpress_id: '445'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---

I haven't been reading a lot of weblogs for the last week nor have I
really been posting. If your life has been interesting but I haven't
commented as someone who reads your blog, it is probably because I
haven't read it.

I heard from R that Ple had given birth this last week. I still haven't
read it myself on her blog. Yet another ex reproducing. The world seems
full of babies these days. At least three ex's of mine have had kids in
the last couple of years. Who is next? :-)

The main reason that I haven't written much is that my trimester ends
next Friday, 4/22. My last papers for each class are both due that day.
In order to avoid a logjam, I've been working to get my history one done
this week. I have now done this. R just proofed it for me (thanks!) and
I cleaned it up based on her remarks and some overall edits that I saw
that needed to be done as I went through it again. I've mailed this off
to my prof now. This leaves my philosophy paper, which I still need to
finish my reading for. That paper is much shorter though. For the
history paper, I had to read a historical book chosen by me so that took
a little longer. I expect that tomorrow will be devoured by text reading
for the current paper.

I'm hoping to get the paper done before Friday but I may wind up working
to the deadline. We'll see. I haven't even done any of my reading for
pleasure much these last few weeks. I have a copy of **[Woken
Furies](http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/057507325X/)** by
Richard Morgan waiting for me or a copy of **[The Coyote Kings of the
Space-Age Bachelor
Pad](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0345466357/)**.
**Woken Furies** will probably be the winner in that battle for
attention. I also have a library copy of**[Shadow Cities: A Billion
Squatters, A New Urban
World](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0415933196/qid=1113714524/sr=8-1/ref=pd_csp_1/102-5812800-5064112?v=glance&s=books&n=507846)**
waiting as well.

Next month, I'll be taking my graduate Religion class and the
introductory graduate Literature class. We'll see if they are easier but
given the topic matters, I expect that the first one won't be too
difficult for me.
