---
author: admin
date: '2006-04-22 03:35:47'
layout: post
slug: getting-older
status: publish
title: Getting older...
wordpress_id: '750'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I must be getting old or I guess I really am an adult now. Hell, my
daughter turned ten recently so that's got to be some sort of milestone.
Me with a ten year old kid. I'm sitting here listening to **Nevermind**
by Nirvana and I realize that it has been fifteen years since it came
out. *Fifteen years?!?* I was just finishing community college and
waiting to transfer into the University of Washington. I remember
sitting around with my BBS geek friends at a party turning up the radio
when **Smells Like Teen Spirit** came on. Nirvana were that local band
that some of us had seen live and they kicked ass and were making it in
the bigtime now. I was just barely twenty years old when **Nevermind**
came out. I went to the record's release party at **Peaches**, a record
store in the University District where a computer store is now. (As it
turns out, my boss of the last five years, until recently, was there
too, as was my friend, John Mueller, whom I only met through
Microsoft...) About 200 or so of us crowded around Nirvana as they
played a little live show for the album. After that show, I went over to
**Dick's** to get burgers and meet my Wiccan friend, Pat. Pat was my
first real friend who was gay and he brought along a girl from his coven
(he was the High Priest) with him. This girl's name was "Chris Smith"
and she would become my first wife. He wanted to introduce us since I
was getting involved with his group and she lived in my part of town.
This was the same time that I was dating
[Pleiades](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/tags/pleiades/), who had
[her first
child](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mohmlet/sets/72057594111036959/)
relatively recently and whom I am still friends with... Probably the
oldest friend that I still have at this point that I actually talk to
occasionally. These are all of the things that come to mind when I hear
this album and I realize (what a trip!) that it was so long ago for me
now and what a punk ass obnoxious kid I was and how much I loved this
music.
