---
author: admin
date: '2006-09-14 01:36:28'
layout: post
slug: aching-bones
status: publish
title: Aching Bones
wordpress_id: '1192'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

R and I went to Aikido this evening. While she's been more recently, it
was the first time I'd been able to go in two and a half or three weeks
between my work schedule, Burning Man, being ill and other untimely
events (at least once I just felt too wiped to deal with being thrown).
I've got to make a better habit out of going though with the two of us
going together, it is generally easier. I'm still quite liking the class
as I sit here with my sore and bruised frame. The people are good and
friendly as well. The sensei is passionate about Aikido but is also not
overly concerned with being overly structured in how he does things.
This gives the class a certain looseness or playfulness that has been
missing at any other dojo that I've been a member of in this life time
(this would be at least the third since my teen time in Karate and
Aikido). People are not overly concerned with rank and I've never gotten
so much as a whiff of attitude from anyone. It is very disarming in an
environment that is, especially for newcomers, very frustrating. Aikido
is not easy in any sense nor do it come very naturally to most. Whatever
gift I had when younger for being thrown and such seems to have
atrophied with disuse. In the long run, it is definitely good that I am
going. If only I could get motivated to do yoga as well... Tomorrow
evening I am having coffee with a few local co-masons. It turns out that
there is a large lodge in San Francisco as well as one in Oakland. While
I am a regular mason (as well as having my OTO connections with esoteric
masonry of sorts), I am curious about co-masonry and would like to talk
with them. One of the two (a husband and wife) is the head of the San
Francisco lodge so she ought to be able to answer questions. I do get
the sense, from having spoken to co-masons online, that theirs is a very
different sort of masonry and one that is actively attracting people and
growing (as well as embracing more esoteric inclinations). This is a far
cry from the masonry that I've been in, which is clearly dying a death
of petrification in the long run. If I did, for some reason, decide to
participate, I'd have to do the honorable thing and resign from all
"regular" masonic associations that I have. We'll see if it comes to
that.
