---
author: admin
date: '2006-04-14 13:02:08'
layout: post
slug: ipoddying
status: publish
title: Ipod...dying...
wordpress_id: '739'
categories:
- Technology
---

I replaced my battery on my Ipod a couple of months ago. Well, I think
that there is something wrong with the electrical on my Ipod besides the
battery. I took it on my trip to the Bay Area the other day. I probably
used it for a total of four or five hours the whole time. The other
night, after I was back, I listened to it for about 20 minutes and it
suddenly died. As it \*poof\*, sound dies, disiplay turns off. Hitting
the buttons did nothing, not even an attempt to bring up the Apple logo
and reboot. In the past, this has meant that it was 100% out of power.
So out of power that it wouldn't even think about booting, in fact. I
plugged it into the wall the next morning and hit the button and it
booted right up so it seems that my battery isn't charging fully or
well. I bought one of the standard replacement batteries (in fact, it is
a larger battery than what my 4th generation Ipod originally shipped
with). I've been maintaining good battery practices. I let it run down
every time I charge it fully. I don't trickle charge it on the computer,
etc. The battery meter on the display was showing roughly 60% power when
it suddenly died the other night. Needless to say, my trust in the Ipod
isn't what it should be. I'm considering alternatives. I use the Ipod to
listen to Podcasts and music (mostly the latter since I drive to work
and my car doesn't have a good sound connector and the radio broadcast
add-ins don't work well). I have a larger music collection than any
device will ever hold so I need decent synching that doesn't make me
want to kill. Itunes is marginal at times but generally works well. I
like that it auto-synchs my podcasts too. I'm open to non-Apple
products. Any suggestions?
