---
author: admin
date: '2006-03-26 16:13:48'
layout: post
slug: wedding-today
status: publish
title: Wedding Today
wordpress_id: '720'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Society
- Spirituality
---

I'm off in about half an hour to perform a wedding for some friends of
mine. This will be the third wedding that I've done and the second that
is for an ex of mine, technically. The interesting thing about the
ceremony, other than the fact that I am doing it, is that it is for two
women and one man. Legally (paperwork, etc.) only two of them, Drake and
Rubylou are getting married. J is a longterm partner to both of them
(and has actually been with Drake for much longer) so the marriage, in
spirit if not the eyes of the law, is for all three to one another. This
makes for an interesting ritual dynamic in the ceremony, itself, since
actions are not being done in pairs but in triplets. It is also
interesting since, while not recognized by the law, this is a same same,
polyamorous marriage and they are certainly treating it as such. The
three of them already have two children together so this is more of a
recognition of their existing, multiyear relationships, and a legal
recognition for two of them (for many reasons). This is my first wedding
since 1998. Back then, I married Lesa to Stephen in a ceremony that Lesa
had mostly written based on fairly standard post-Golden Dawn Hermetic
symbolism. Since Lesa was (is?) a practitioner of Golden Dawn-derived
work, it worked out well for them (Stephen didn't have a preference).
Lesa and I lived together for a couple of years following my first
marriage so I was quite touched to be asked to do the ceremony. Rubylou
and I dated (whatever we called it) during the tail end of Lesa's
relationship with me. For those that don't know, up until my
relationship with my current wife, I was pretty active within the
polyamorous community so many of the people I dated overlapped with one
another as none of the relationships were exclusive. The relationships
were generally well defined but not really approachable by conventional
labels. When R (my wife) and I got together, we both stopped dating
other people very quickly for a variety of reasons and we've been
together for over five years now and married for a year and a half.
That's all an aside though. Rubylou and I dated for a while (a year or
two) and we've been extremely close since before we dated and have
maintained that since that time, through a marriage and the birth of her
children. I've known her for thirteen years or more (since I graduated
college). I was extremely honored when she asked me to perform the
ceremony about a month ago. Hopefully, the three of them are happy with
the result. I'll probably post the ceremony later if they say that they
don't mind.
