---
author: admin
date: '2006-01-27 02:46:18'
layout: post
slug: new-role
status: publish
title: New Role
wordpress_id: '674'
categories:
- Daily Life
---
I have now officially converted from being a Software Test Lead reporting to  the Director of Test for my department (Internet Explorer) to being a Project  Manager on the Program Management team in the same group. I'm reporting to a  Program Manager Lead that I've worked with for three or so years now and who I  have a pretty friendly relationship with. Technically, my role still reports to  my old manager to the extent that he will be turning in my review but I am  having a "semester abroad" working for the PM team and "dotted line" reporting  to my new manager. My day to day work and my coaching will be done by my new  manager and my title has been changed (which we were in the process of doing  even when I was in the test org since I don't really lead a test team and  haven't for a year now).

This is something that came to a head during the last two weeks with some  work that I'd been investigating for the team and which we've committed to do.  I'm not going to speak publicly about the project, which hasn't been announced,  but my work will be focused on external customers and our relationships with  them. I'm going to continue to run the blog for the IE team and I'll probably  wind up working on related areas in this combined space over time.

After eight and a half years as a full time employee in test, I now work for  the dark side. My questions on where to get khakis and polo shirts for a good  price was ignored by the PM management team...
