---
author: admin
date: '2006-10-19 21:20:52'
layout: post
slug: co-masonry
status: publish
title: Co-masonry?
wordpress_id: '1415'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Society
- Spirituality
---

A month ago, I had dinner in San Francisco with the master of the Santa
Cruz co-masonic lodge and her husband (also a member). I was feeling out
what they are doing and trying to get a sense of co-masonry. I've now
gone through the traditional three "blue lodge" degrees in masonry
(almost a year ago now) and have been considering whether to continue in
it or not. I enjoy the ritual and the principles of Freemasonry but it
is clearly dying. I'm not sure if I want to fight that uphill battle,
especially when the existing masons, largely senior citizens, often want
to fight any of the changes that would change masonry tooth and nail. In
contrast, Co-masonry (which allows both men and women to be masons
together) is a growing concern. They are opening new lodges in places
and generally seem very intent on the degrees and the principles behind
them. They also work the entire range of degrees (derived from the
Scottish Rite) within one organizational system. The general tone, from
what I can tell from having spoken to quite a few of them online, seems
higher and more involved. They are also generally much younger. This
Sunday, the Santa Cruz lodge is having a semi-open event and I was
invited to attend. So I'll be driving down there Sunday morning to spend
the afternoon with them. I have an application so it is a matter of
making a decision about what I want to do. If I did join, I would
formally resign from mainstream masonry and I would never discuss its
details, ritual or otherwise, with co-masons or others. I believe this
is in keeping with the oaths that I took. Crossing the streams would be
bad... Some might ask why I even care, as someone who is primarily
focused on Buddhist practice, but I do enjoy masonry, the heritage
associated with it, and its ritual work. I also enjoy, frankly,
fraternity. I used to be an Odd Fellow before resigning during my first
marriage and that is an aspect of Odd Fellowship that I do recall with
great fondness. For those interested, the organization's website is at
[http://www.comasonry.org](http://www.comasonry.org/) (strangely).
