---
author: admin
date: '2006-06-11 22:32:53'
layout: post
slug: third-day-of-ase-conference
status: publish
title: Third Day of ASE Conference
wordpress_id: '1109'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---

For the third day of the ASE Conference, we only had morning sessions.
It started overly early at 8:30 AM. I attended the "Esotericisms Modern
and Postmodern" and "Methodological Problems in Esoteric Studies" panels
before we closed with the business meeting for the organization. The
first session had an interesting presentation on the "techno-occultism"
of Aum Shinrikyo by Purdom Lindblad out of the work she is developing (I
believe for her MA or PhD but I'm not sure). The best presentation was
Alfred Vitale's presentation, "A Modern Occult Aesthetic: Media as
Ritual Technology in the works of Kenneth Anger and Grant Morrison." I'm
not a big Ken Anger fan but Alfred had a good discussion of how the
ritual activities in his films are not films of enactments of ritual
events but are themselves ritual events in which the observers (us) are
participants, which was part of Anger's genius. The Grant Morrison
discussion focused on Morrison's work on *The Invisibles* (which happens
to be my favorite comic series ever) and the esoteric or magical intent
behind it that Morrison had. Alfred got to have a good discussion of
sigilization and viral memes as part of this. Given the questions
afterwords, it was clear that much of the younger audience were fans of
Grant Morrison's work and the discussion was quite fun. The second
session were presentations by Richard Smoley, former editor of *Gnosis*
magazine, and Christopher Lehrich on methodological issues in studying
esotericism or of even constructing categories to call "esotericism" or
"magic." Claire Fanger followed up with a counterpoint addressing both
presenters and then there was some discussion. Smoley drew the analogy
to a discipline of people dedicated to the discussion of wine, wine
tasting, wine creation, etc. in which no one was allowed to drink wine
or even, usually, to admit that wine might actually exist (except for
the few that had secretly had wine but didn't tell anyone for fear of
what might happen). He used this humorous analogy for how academics
study esotericism and magic in general but are not supposed to either
experience or practice it themselves or admit that there might be
anything at all to it. His fear is that by the study gaining legitimacy
with the current development of the discipline, that the essence of what
is interesting or vital in esotericism might be actually destroyed. An
analogy to what has happened to philosophy or theology over time was
used as well. (This is a simplistic explanation of his talk but it is
hard to summarize otherwise.) Following the close of events and the
"good bye" said to all, Amy, Autumn, Fox, and I went over to Redrum
Burger and had a bit of lunch and final discussion. I expect that I will
see more of the Autumn and Fox since they live in the Bay Area and I am
sure that Amy will be back again since she has many friends out here.
