---
author: admin
date: '2006-01-03 02:44:31'
layout: post
slug: weekend-and-books
status: publish
title: Weekend and Books
wordpress_id: '659'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Back to work tomorrow but at least it is a four day week. R and I had a
relatively quiet weekend at home.

The Heaven and Hell Ball was fun though I think it was overpriced for
what they offered (unless you were really into some of the music). It
was good to see Circus Contraption doing their thing and we got to see a
bit of burlesque on the "Hell" side as well, which is always fun.
Creative use of little plastic disks and all that. We stayed and drank
until a bit after midnight and then wandered over to the Hurricane Cafe
to gorge ourselves mightily on breakfast food. That was a last hurrah
because R and I are both switching our diets over to the "South Beach
Diet" which is vaguely similar to Atkins but a bit more sane in that you
send to eat a lot of vegetables and high fiber things and keep the
protein lean. We need to modify our food intake so I'm back to being on
a now-sugar, lower carb thing (bye bye, bread and potatoes!).

I did a bit of reading this weekend. I finished Liz Williams' **[Snake
Agent](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/159780018X/)** the other day and
read **[9 Tail
Fox](http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/0575076151/)** by Grimwood
in the last 30 hours or so. That's enough Chinese gods and spirits for a
while, I think. Moving to the West, I will be reading Hal Duncan's
**[Vellum](http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/1405052082/)** this
week, which is his take on angels and the War in Heaven.

Next week, I start my school term so my time for reading for pleasure
will go down a lot. I also got **[Cosa Nostra: A History of the Sicilian
Mafia](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1403966966/)** from the library.
This covers, among other things, some of the ritual aspects of the mafia
and goes well with the books on the Chinese tongs that I've been reading
over the last couple of years. I'm fascinated by secret societies
(strangely enough), especially the ones with political or criminal ends
(as if there is a difference).

I also picked up **[Philosophy Before Socrates: An Introduction with
Texts and Commentary](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0872201759/)** by
Richard D. McKirahan, Jr. which I found for $10. For my Greek philosophy
graduate class next term, I have to do an original research paper
relating to Greek philosophy and I'm considering the pre-Socratics. With
my own love of Neoplatonists, which pretty much all date to the Roman
era and are not Greek, I have to move outside my comfort zone. The same
goes for much of the Stoic thought that I like.
