---
author: admin
date: '2007-04-28 21:27:48'
layout: post
slug: reality
status: publish
title: Reality
wordpress_id: '1681'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Society
- Spirituality
---

One of the vows in my daily Buddhist practices contains the following
line:

> "I avoid setting myself against the world."

This is something that I find myself returning to again and again over
time. Not setting yourself against the world means (among other things)
recognizing the world is as it truly is, not as we wish to be. The world
can only be such, regardless of how we throw ourselves against it or
wish it to be otherwise. The world simply is... So much of our anger or
frustration in life, our basic unhappiness, is because we want the world
to be something other than it really is when it comes down to it.
Learning to accept the world is part of the path to peace. This isn't to
say that we don't struggle or strive to change the world. This is not
simply an excuse to look at the problems of the world and say, "Well,
that's how the world is. I need to accept that and let it go." Much of
the world, especially the human world, is the product of choices.
Sometimes these are simply the choices of individuals as individuals and
sometimes they are the choices of individuals in aggregate, as
societies. As we all know, often it is the "system" that restricts and
controls choices, or at least the easy ones. We have a duty, a
necessity, to make the world a better place. The one aspect of modern
Buddhist thought that I agree with, at least conceptually, is that of
engaged Buddhism. Aligning ourselves with the powers and archons
(rulers) of this world is not an acceptable choice when there is so much
suffering around us constantly. We should not be coopted. We should not
simply be good little citizens accepting of the choices made for us. To
be truly free individuals, we have to be willing to subvert the dominant
paradigm, to use a cliche, and go against the grain. There is so much
suffering that could be alleviated in the world simply by the choices of
individuals if people actually make a choice. This would leave us to
focus on those facets that are not simply the products of choice but
intrinsic to the human condition, which Buddhism can address. Not
setting myself against the world means recognizing what can be changed
and what cannot be changed. It means not throwing myself against the
brick wall of reality over and over again, beating myself bloody,
because I am unwilling to accept reality. Recognizing things as they are
allows me to focus on what can actually be changed for the better, for
everyone as well as myself. As I've said before, we need to recognize
that no rescue party is on the way. No one is going to save us, from
ourselves, from our choices, from our leaders, or even from our
civilization. It is necessary for us to step up and save ourselves.
**You**, me, everyone. We are the leaders and our existing leaders are
no different than us except for their wealth, their positions in the
system, and their willingness to made decisions. I believe we are all
free, radically so. My spirituality is
[antinomial](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antinomianism) and I believe
that any truly free individual will operate in that space as well but we
need to recognize that we are truly free and that we can change the
world in order for it to occur. Think about it. Think about your place
in the world, not the one that you've been told or the hole that the peg
of yourself fits in. Make a choice and look at the world. Do not set
yourself against the world and recognize what can and cannot be changed
and what is fundamental to the world. **Act**.
