---
author: admin
date: '2007-07-13 23:12:32'
layout: post
slug: work-environments
status: publish
title: Work Environments
wordpress_id: '1752'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Society
- Technology
---

I realized the other day that I'm not sure I could work in a "normal"
work environment or that I even really understand one anymore on a gut
level. I've worked in tech for 13 years now, since a year after I
graduated college. The shit job I had at an occult bookstore I had in
the year between college and tech doesn't really count as a "normal"
work environment to contrast against. I mean, the boss used to close the
store early on occasion to lock the doors, go in the back room, and
light up a joint. The only thing I have to show for that job, other than
a few books that I still own and a dislike of crazy people, is a few
friends and/or ex-lovers that I met while working there... I see
representations of the work environments that a lot of people work
within and I've seen hints of it, especially in the year that I was at
MobiTV. Lightless offices full of beige cubicles occupied by people in
white shirts, occasionally even ties and dress shoes. Think of the
opening scenes of the Matrix where Mr. Anderson is at work. The kind of
environments full of bad feng shui that convince people to take a coffee
break up to an upper deck and leap off in order to alleviate
boredom/stress/ennui/despair-at-life. Generally speaking, most tech jobs
are much different, especially in the boom years where companies are
striving with great diligence to convince employees not to go elsewhere
for more cash/options/food like the little mercenaries that most smart
industrial workers really are... (My grandfather worked for the same
company from almost the time he graduated college until retirement, with
only a government job for a year or two in between at the beginning. I
believe his reward was a nice watch and a pension.) This is especially
true in the Bay Area, where tech is king, whether people like it or not.
Rather than the arrangement described above (well, honestly, a lot of
places are still cubicle farms), it is much more common to see tech
workers, ill kept and in flip-flops, cavorting around in shorts with
their free Red Bull fighting with nerf (tm) weapons or playing with
their wii (tm). At my current job (which is, admittedly, owned by a
non-profit foundation), this came to me when I wandered through the
downstairs on the way out the other night. At nearly 7:00 PM, a group of
coworkers and interns were sitting on the giant couches in front of the
projection tv playing a sports game on the Xbox 360 that lives in the
area. This was the first time I'd seen the wii unplugged in weeks.
Normally, they are playing tennis on it in groups of four. Looking at
these young guys (early 20s) with their free drinks playing games,
having a good time, reminded me far more of the break areas back in
college than it did of your typical pitiless mercantile master of a
corporation. I am certain that the creators of the space in the company
would be quite glad with the comparison as well. We're next door (down
the block in either direction) to Google, which I have visited on
occasion. It has been commented on in a blog recently (no, I don't
remember where) about how Google takes college graduates, who have been
living in the dorms for years, and gives them a cool place to work where
they are fed free food in a cafeteria, dentists and other professional
services are brought in and, basically, the people can continue to live
just like they did in college in the dorms except they actually find
their own apartments or group houses. Their needs are met in a "fun" and
"playful" atmosphere which, in many ways, seeks to artificially extend
the college experience well into later adulthood. Now, I kind of roll my
eyes at this and think of crass motives on the part of founders of
companies but, really, if you reflect on it, it isn't a bad deal or a
bad environment, all things considered. Compare this to working in a
financial company, like a bank or a brokerage, or in a service industry
and you get the idea that it is nice to be coddled and given a playful
environment instead of wanting to hang yourself by your regulation
necktie (except on Fridays, when you'd have to use your shoelaces unless
you're wearing loafers -- in which case, you are truly fucked). Of
course, one possible downside to this is the sheer unreality of the
whole thing. Compare this pampered existence (or at least shielded one
in a over the top friendly environment) with the reality of worklife for
most of the globe and the contrast and ginormous (now a word!) gap is
quite striking. What happens when Timmy the Googler gets laid off (of
course not!) or just burned out and finds out at age 30-something that
the world isn't the nice ride he's been given up to that point. The
level of privilege could cause problems for some. That said, at the end
of the day, I know what kind of environment I'd rather work in if I'm
working for someone other than myself.
