---
author: admin
date: '2007-09-29 06:23:17'
layout: post
slug: kyoto-fun
status: publish
title: Kyoto Fun
wordpress_id: '1959'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I'm not going to take a lot of time to post tonight. The weather finally
broke here so instead of being 85 degrees with high humidity (and sweat
running down the insides of your clothing), it was overcast, slightly
rainy at times, and about 70 degrees. That was a nice change. Since I'm
from Seattle originally, a little rain doesn't bother me but the heat
really does. Yesterday, we visited the Kyoto Imperial Palace (which was
a bit of a yawn) and [Nijo
Castle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nijo_Castle), which was much more
interesting. Nijo Castle does not allow photos of the interior (a
practice that seems to be common with cultural treasures in Japan) but
it is full of beautiful rooms with painted panels that are hundreds of
years old.

[![DSCF0712.JPG](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1053/1452190722_23499440dd.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/1452190722/ "Photo Sharing")

Following this, we took the trip out to see
[Nanzen-ji](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanzen-ji), which is one of the
five great temples of Kyoto and an important one for Rinzai Zen. The
temple there was beautiful and part of a larger complex. It had some
very nice rooms and shrine areas (again, no pictures allowed) and some
out "dry" Zen gardens. Following this, on the suggestion of our
guidebook, we made the climb into the wooded hills behind Nanzen-ji to
Nanzen-ji Oku-no-in. This turned out to have a beautiful set of small
shrines and a small, cultivated, waterfall, along with a shrine in a
cave. All of this at the top of some steps cemented into the rocks and
across a small bridge.

[![DSCF0822.JPG](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1036/1452282620_243e100b55.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/1452282620/ "Photo Sharing")

[![DSCF0830.JPG](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1393/1451429529_04278f1f2d.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/1451429529/ "Photo Sharing")

Today, we went to To-ji, one of the main Shingon temples in Kyoto. This
temple was given over to [Kobo
Daishi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kūkai) by the emperor and [became
one of the core Shingon temples early
on](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kūkai#The_T.C5.8D-ji_Period). It as a
pagoda that is reputed to have been built by him as well.

[![DSCF0871.JPG](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1021/1456764247_0fc79712ef.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/1456764247/ "Photo Sharing")

It also has one of the most impressive statuary displays inside,
including a beautiful statue of Mahavairocana supported by the twelve
generals, one of Fudo Myoo and the other light kings, and a number of
others. Unfortunately, I was not allowed to take pictures of these
either. I did drop a hefty chunk of change picking up some images of
Fudo Myoo and the Taizokai and Kongokai Mandalas that they had there
(suitable for framing), along with a few odds and ends. We closed the
day with some shopping elsewhere and a visit to Heian-jingu, a national
Shinto shrine that had some impressive buildings but felt a little
underwhelming otherwise. Here are links to some of my galleries of
photos from the last two days:

-   [Kyoto Imperial
    Palace](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157602191202293/)
-   [Nijo
    Castle](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157602183814866/)
-   [Nanzen-ji](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157602191481133/)
-   [To-ji](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157602203255923/)
-   [Heian-jingu](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157602203274971/)

