---
author: admin
date: '2007-07-01 22:26:02'
layout: post
slug: weight-loss
status: publish
title: Weight Loss
wordpress_id: '1738'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I need to lose weight. I've needed to lose weight for a long time (like
ten years) but I think I really need to figure this out. While I'm a
large framed, broad shouldered fellow, I'm also over 220 pounds. I can
carry it relatively well (farmer stock) but I'm waaaaaay fatter than I
should be. I should be around 175 or 180 pounds. I haven't seen that
since I was 23 or 24 though. When I started working in tech after
college and got married, I started gaining weight. Even doing martial
arts several times a week in my early 20's wasn't enough to do more than
slow it down at the time. Men on my dad's side of the family all get
heavy as they get older and I'm beginning to look like them. The other
side of that is that men in my dad's family all have heart trouble by
their mid-40's or so. Technically, even though my dad had a terminal
illness, it was his heart that killed him. His cousin, Eddy, in his
mid-40's has already had a heart attack. My grandfather on that side has
had multiple heart surgeries. The problem? Well, I have poor impulse
control with food in a family that runs to fat. The real problem is that
I'm a sedentary bookish type who works in software so I spent the
**vast** majority of my waking hours parked in a chair. Now that I am
commuting in to Silicon Valley almost an hour each way, I'm spending
time on my butt in traffic. (I'm starting to telecommute two days a week
this week but still...). I need to figure what I can do at home, beyond
eating rationally, to begin to lose weight. Going in to work in the
morning, getting home in mid to late evening and **then** working out
for an hour every day is not going to work. As it is, it is hard for me
to find time to eat dinner, meditate and then work on my thesis or spend
time with my wife (not to mention anything else). I'm up late but I
doubt I'm going to work out at midnight. Part of the solution may be
getting up earlier. I've been considering this to move my primary
meditation practice to the morning but I am not a morning person and it
is hard to get up earlier and do things before going to work. In any
case, this isn't meant to be a whine. If people do have suggestions on
physical activities for desk jockies to help with getting into better
shape, I'm all ears.
