---
author: admin
date: '2007-12-14 02:16:45'
layout: post
slug: western-esotericism-and-the-net
status: publish
title: Western Esotericism and the Net
wordpress_id: '2136'
categories:
- Academic
- Esoteric
- Spirituality
---

![Rose Cross](http://www.arcanology.com/images/rosecross.gif)"[Western
Esotericism](http://www.esoteric.msu.edu/Hanegraaff.html)" as a field of
study continues to develop within the halls of Academia. Last year, I
attended the second International Conference on Esotericism at the
University of California, Davis. This was organized by the [Association
for the Study of Esotericism](http://www.aseweb.org/) (ASE), of which I
am a member as well. The ASE has the official mission "to promote
excellence in scholarship and teaching in the study of esotericism and
mysticism. This is to be accomplished through conferences and meetings,
publications, programs, and membership services" and is an academic
organization primarily filled with the few professors teaching in this
area, at least part of the time, and graduate students working on
degrees focusing on some aspect of Western Esotericism. There is a
sister organization (in a way), the [European Society for the Study of
Western Esotericism](http://www.esswe.org/) (ESSWE). I've been aware of
the existence of it but did not find its web site until this evening.
Strangely, roughly half of the membership of the European Society are
Americans and I expect that I will probably join as well as it seems
complimentary to the membership in the ASE. It turns out that the ESSWE
maintains a [blog](http://esswe.blogspot.com/) for their newsletter as
well. This blog actually seems to receive posts on a regular basis.
Among other items of interest are a report from the very recently held
meeting of the American Academy of Religion (AAR), which is the primary
academic body for people working in the field of religion or religious
studies in the United States. Within the AAR, there is a group focused
on Western Esotericism, as well as one focusing on on Pagan Studies (the
Conference on Contemporary Pagan Studies). The report on the blog gives
some details of the events at the AAR meeting and is [worth a
read](http://esswe.blogspot.com/2007/12/american-academy-of-religion-2007.html)
for those interested in such things. Another item of interest is a post,
"[The Demarcation of Western Esotericism in Theory and
Practice](http://esswe.blogspot.com/2007/12/demarcation-of-western-esotericism-in.html),"
by Sara M. Thejls. The Scandinavian members of ESSWE have also started
up their own [blog](http://snaswe.blogspot.com/) for the Scandinavian
Network for the Academic Study of Western Esotericism (SNASWE). (*You
have to love all these acronyms...*) This is edited by Henrik Bogdan
whose [recent
work](http://www.amazon.com/Western-Esotericism-Initiation-Esoteric-Traditions/dp/0791470695)
on comparing and contrasting Masonic, Golden Dawn, and Wiccan initiation
ceremonies has finally been produced by an academic press. I read a copy
of the dissertation that this is based on for my own thesis relating to
the Golden Dawn and I like his work there and elsewhere. There is also
another [blog](http://ccwe.wordpress.com/) run by the independent
"Cambridge Centre for Western Esotericism" in the UK. All of this is a
relatively new development. A few years ago, there were very few people
actively blogging or publicly discussing Western Esotericism on the Net.
Those that had been were independent bloggers like myself, [Grant
Potts](http://www.religiousthought.com/blog/), or a few other parties.
Most of the activity has been behind the relatively closed doors of
small or private e-mail lists run by the few of us working actively in
these areas (though there currently is no good list for discussing
Western Esotericism). The move towards more public academic activity
through the use of blogs is a nice change.
