---
author: admin
date: '2007-06-12 17:03:09'
layout: post
slug: black-summer
status: publish
title: Black Summer
wordpress_id: '1723'
categories:
- Science Fiction
---

I just read the first issue of Warren Ellis' new comic, **Black
Summer**. Actually, technically, it is issue zero since the first full
issue isn't until August. I'm not usually one for "underwear pervert"
comics anymore (as Ellis has labeled most superhero comics). I tend to
like things like [**The
Invisibles**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Invisibles) or
[**Transmetropolitan**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmetropolitan)
when reading comics. I was lucky enough (one guesses) to be exposed by
my mother to the original [**Heavy
Metal**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heavy_Metal_(magazine)) magazine
as a child, which was then a translation of the French [**Metal
Hurlant**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metal_Hurlant). This exposed me
to the fact that there was a lot more to the medium of comics than just
Spinderman or the X-Men, as much as I used to love those comics. Later
on, I returned the favor to my mother and exposed her to **Lone Wolf and
Cub**, along with a number of other atypical comics. Generally, I enjoy
Ellis' comic work. I've been waiting for
[**Planetary**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planetary_(comics)) to
finish and following some of his upcoming efforts. **Black Summer**
looks to have a lot of potential for some political commentary beyond
the utterly simplistic. The premise is pretty basic: There was once a
group of heroes, self-made, called the **Seven Guns**. They were a bunch
of young people that wanted to take back their cities from corrupt cops,
crime, and drug gangs. They succeeded and became acclaimed by the public
as heroes. Years later, the group no longer exists. Some have died or
been horribly injured but one of their more powerful members has been a
friend to the White House and consulted by them on various matters. One
day, this member, John Horus, decides that the president and
vice-president are criminals engaged in the subversion of liberty in the
U.S. and he kills them as such. He then goes on national tv to explain
the hypocrisy of lauding a group of heroes for fighting crime and then
expecting them to do nothing with criminals in the U.S. government...

![John
Horus](http://www.arcanology.com/images/Black_Summer006.png "John Horus")

I'm looking forward to where this goes.
