---
author: admin
date: '2007-06-17 23:38:52'
layout: post
slug: marriage
status: publish
title: Marriage
wordpress_id: '1730'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

My friend, John Mueller, got married without telling anyone until after
the fact recently. I blogged about this before. I've been pondering
marriage. As my friends know, I'm married and have been since October,
2004. This is my second marriage. The first took place in June, 1994 and
last until July, 1997. I've realized over the last year or so that I was
kind of a shit of a husband the first time around. We were pretty young
(22 for me and 20 for her) when we got married. I don't think either of
us really knew what we were getting into and we wound up married more
because it was the expected thing than for any other reason. It didn't
end well though, in retrospect with some perspective, it didn't go as
far south as it seemed at the time or as badly as I have seen some
marriages go. I certainly didn't treat my wife well and I was probably
pretty difficult in general to deal with. I've pretty much always been
behind the curve in emotional maturity, which is not a good combination
with a young marriage. Looking at my current marriage, I've realized
that marriage is hard work and that there is no roadmap for it. I'm not
always the best of husbands. I get lazy or complacent and I take my wife
for granted. It takes work to make a marriage really work and I've not
always really lived up to my end of things. This isn't done knowingly
but if I honestly look at things, I can see it in my actions and
thoughts. I don't have a really good idea of what a successful marriage
looks like in a lot of ways. What is "success" in marriage? I've seen
all kinds of marriages. Some odd ones seem to work for some people but
I've also learned that things may look like they are working to external
parties when, really, they aren't working at all. This all becomes
apparent the day that things blow up. For myself, I come from a
classical broken home. My parents divorced when I was an infant (I
actually don't know how old I was but it was young) and I was largely
raised by my single mother. Later on, she remarried but for much of my
childhood, it was just she and I. My grandparents are still married and
they love each other but there marriage has always seemed to be of the
mold of an earlier generation. R's parents have been married her whole
life and she grew up with both of them together. R has never been
married before either. Because of these, I think we've come into being
married with a lot of unspoken (probably unconscious) expectations. The
most important thing, that I can see, for a marriage is communication
and sharing together. This means shared time, shared priorities, shared
goals. It is easy to forget this in the busy busy world that we live in,
especially when each of us has our own careers and many interests that
the other doesn't share. It is easy for married people to fall into
these ruts in their lives where they work and come home in the evening
but don't really focus on each other as they recover from a day at work
or focus on various personal priorities. With my school work, my
computer fun (like blogging and podcasts), and even just focusing on my
Buddhist stuff or reading books, I've seen myself do this. Every so
often, things remind me to pull my head up and look around. Hopefully, I
learn a little when this happens and I realize that I'm not focusing on
my marriage and R like I should be... I love you, Rebecca. At the
beginning and end of the day, it's the two of us and I hope that it
always will be.
