---
author: admin
date: '2007-08-21 21:56:25'
layout: post
slug: visitors
status: publish
title: Visitors
wordpress_id: '1785'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Other than my birthday, I had a bit more social activity in the last few
days than normal. On Friday, my friend, Elizabeth, from Portland was
visiting the area for yoga training at [Yoga Kula](http://yogakula.com/)
in Berkeley. I'm not sure how long it has been since I saw her but I'm
sure it has been more than a year. We went out to dinner and coffee in
order to chat. She mentioned that [Douglas
Brooks](http://www.rajanaka.com/) is associated with Yoga Kula and
teaches there occasionally. I'd forgotten them. If you are interested in
Hindu Tantricism, he is pretty well regarded. On Monday, I had the day
off because Mozilla makes your birthday an official holiday day. (How
cool is that?) Jisho Sensei was in town for the annual meeting of the
American Psychological Association in San Francisco. (This is where they
discussed whether psychologists can help the CIA create their
non-torture that I blogged about recently). Jisho is a clincal
psychologist as well as being a priest and teacher in the Buddhist
organization with which I am associated. Because he was in town for the
conference, it seemed a good chance to get together. Jisho had only been
to the Bay Area once before and normally lives in Ohio. I took him over
to the Japanese Tea Garden at Golden Gate Park and then down to the
ocean. Later on, we went to a late lunch and got to spend a fair bit of
time together discussing various Buddhist and academic things. All in
all, not an exciting weekend report but I was glad for the chance to see
people.
