---
author: admin
date: '2007-09-09 18:58:03'
layout: post
slug: cory-doctorow-could-use-mozilla-help
status: publish
title: Cory Doctorow Could Use Mozilla Help
wordpress_id: '1819'
categories:
- Mozilla
- Notable People
- Science Fiction
- Technology
---

I [mentioned the other
day](http://www.arcanology.com/2007/09/06/cory-doctorows-firefox-theme/)
that writer, activist, and ne'erdowell , Cory Doctorow, wanted to
release a theme and/or some kind of bundle alongside his next science
fiction novel, **Little Brother**. This is a young adult novel focused
on hacker kids and includes some supporting activities to help get kids
more involved with the ideas within the book. Cory has read part of
Chapter 12 from the book previously and released it as a
[podcast](http://craphound.com/?p=1819). I include a link to the audio
of that below. Since I posted the other day, Cory and I have discussed
what he's trying to do in relation to [Firefox](http://www.mozilla.com)
and [Tor](http://tor.eff.org) in some detail. Within the book, he has a
character using Tor to get around his school's network restrictions to
download a book. Cory wants, as an educational and promotional use
together, to replicate this by making some kind of joint install of Tor
(probably installing [Vidalia](http://vidalia-project.net/)) and Firefox
available. Also, this would use a Firefox theme based on the book's art.
He also wants the [Foxyproxy](http://foxyproxy.mozdev.org/) extension
installed as well and configured to use Tor. Simple, right? :-) The
issue here is that Cory is a Science Fiction writer, not a theme
creator/artist or a Firefox guru. He could use some help from the
community. Since much of his fan base are computer geeks who know of his
work with the EFF and BoingBoing, I figure that might not be too hard to
muster up but I do know it needs to be sought out. That's why I'm
posting here today. I'm a QA guy and I've already volunteered my help to
him but my skills and knowledge are limited here. I'm not sure what the
best solution is to fulfill Cory's relatively benign desires. I
suggested to him that rolling a custom build of Firefox is **not** ideal
as you'd want anyone who downloads this to get normal security updates
and the like, which presupposes a normal build. What I suggested, off
the top of my head, is that someone could write an installer that grabs
the current build of Firefox and the current build of Vidalia, installs
theme, and then grabs his theme and FoxyProxy, configuring Firefox to
use them. Maybe a zipfile with all of these could work though but
grabbing the most current builds would be best since, in the last month,
I know that Tor has released at least two updates and Firefox releases
one every two months or so on average. The risk of installing out of
date software is there otherwise. This gets around the idea of creating
a custom Firefox build. I'm not sure if this is the best solution but it
is what occurred to me. If anyone in the community is interested in
helping with this installation/configuration problem or has a good
solution, please e-mail me through my gmail account
([albill@gmail.com](mailto:albill@gmail.com)). Also, beyond this, if
anyone would be interested in helping with making a theme based on the
artwork for Tor Books' (the publisher) art department, that would be
helpful and is a pretty self-contained issue.
