---
author: admin
date: '2008-05-10 12:47:42'
layout: post
slug: playing-zendo
status: publish
title: Playing Zendo
wordpress_id: '2221'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

Last night, R and I went over to the house of friends who have a regular
game night. Other than a general interest in playing games with people,
we went over in order to learn to play
**[Zendo](http://www.koryheath.com/games/zendo)**. Zendo is a game
played with the Icehouse pyramids available from [Looney
Labs](http://www.looneylabs.com/). These are hollow, translucent colored
pyramids that are stackable and come in three sizes (small, medium, and
large), fitting within each other.

[![stacked\_pyramids](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3154/2480544637_914842e2ea.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2480544637/ "stacked_pyramids by albill, on Flickr")

With Zendo, one player takes on the role of "Master" for the game.
Everyone else is a player. The Master determines a rule for the game and
then constructs two "koans" from Icehouse pyramids. One koan exhibits
the rule and one koan does not exhibit the rule and they are marked with
a white and black stone, respectively, to represent this. A koan that
represents the rule is said to have the Buddha-nature, while one that
does not meet the rule's criteria, does not have a Buddha-nature. The
players are not told what the rule actually is though. (It can be simple
or complex, such as "A koan has the Buddha-nature if it has at least one
green pyramid and exactly one upright pyramid.") Here is the example of
the beginning of a game we played with the initial two koans from the
Master set up and marked:

[![Beginning of a
Game](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3041/2480148312_48146d95d2.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2480148312/ "Beginning of a Game by albill, on Flickr")\
*It **looks** simple...*

The players each take turns in order. In a player's turn, he or she
builds a koan from the unused pyramids, arranging them in any manner.
The player then calls out "Master" or "Mondo." If the player calls
"Master", the Master examines the koan and then marks it with a white
stone if it has the Buddha-nature and a black stone if it does not. If
the player calls "Mondo", then all players at the table, using a black
or white stone hidden in their hand, make a guess as to whether they
think that the koan in question has the Buddha-nature. Those that guess
correctly, are giving a green "guessing stone." At the end of any
player's turn, that player can spend a guessing stone, and give the
master their guess of what the rule for the game is. If they guess
correctly, they win the game. Otherwise, their guessing stone is spent
and the game continues to the next player.

[![IMG\_0105.JPG](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3013/2480148676_c586e43c34.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2480148676/ "IMG_0105.JPG by albill, on Flickr")\
*A game in progress...*

The job of the Master is to create a good game and to select koans that
will be fun for the skill level of the players. In this regard, the
Master is more like the game master in role-playing games and is not an
opponent. Our first few games went fairly quickly. R and I had never
played before and we had two other players who had only played a few
times. One of the fellows one two games in a row and I managed to win
one. We then switched masters and the rule created by her turned out to
be very hard for our table. After about 40 minutes of play, we were
nearly out of available pyramids and everyone was still clueless as to
the rule. That game wound up being a draw. The Master pointed out that
it wasn't even that hard of a rule (which is true in retrospect when we
found out what it was) but we all went in the wrong direction with it.
We definitely had a good time and I like the game. Unfortunately, since
you need at least three people to play (and five or six seems to be
optimal), we won't get to play it very often.
