---
author: admin
date: '2008-05-22 01:52:14'
layout: post
slug: doctorows-little-brother-reading-with-qa-in-berkeley
status: publish
title: Doctorow's 'Little Brother' Reading with Q&A in Berkeley
wordpress_id: '2227'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

[![Cory Doctorow Reading at Cody's Books -
3](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3180/2512689903_f489112690_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2512689903/ "Cory Doctorow Reading at Cody's Books - 3 by albill, on Flickr")
This evening, I went to [Cody's Books](http://codysbooks.com/) in
Berkeley and attended a reading of "[Little
Brother](http://craphound.com/littlebrother/)" by Cory Doctorow, which
was preceded and followed by a question and answer session. This was
part of Cory's book tour to promote "Little Brother" so it combined the
spoken portion with a book signing session (which I actually skipped).
He opened with a brief question and answer bit while people were getting
settled, read most of a chapter from the book, and then took some more
questions at the end. The chapter was actually the same one that I had
heard him read before and I expect that it is one of his favorites to
read (though I didn't ask). Since I've read the book and heard that
chapter before, I was more interested in the question and answer
portion, which had some interesting bits. Rather than summarizing it,
I'll present you with a recording of the evening. With the permission of
both Cory and Cody's Books, I recorded the entire thing. I've uploaded
it to the [Internet Archive](http://www.archive.org) under a [Creative
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share
Alike](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/) license. The
Internet Archive page for it is available
[here](http://www.archive.org/details/Doctorow_Little_Brother_Reading_at_Codys_Books)
with multiple file sizes and formats. I've also embedded it below for
readers here on my blog or reading my feed. (***Note:** Strangely, the
IA player has a stutter with the 256Kbps file so if you listen there,
listen directly to the .mp3 files without using their player or use a
smaller file.*)

[![Cory Doctorow Reading at Cody's Books -
5](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2302/2513324100_77abc1a653.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2513324100/ "Cory Doctorow Reading at Cody's Books - 5 by albill, on Flickr")
