---
author: admin
date: '2008-06-14 01:18:50'
layout: post
slug: one-year-at-mozilla
status: publish
title: One Year at Mozilla
wordpress_id: '2240'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Mozilla
- Technology
---

[![teamwork](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3069/2577507114_be254a351b_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2577507114/ "teamwork by albill, on Flickr")

Today, June 14th, is the one year anniversary of my starting at the
Mozilla Corporation. I transitioned from spending a year at
[MobiTV](http://www.mobitv.com), a startup doing television on cell
phones. I suppose that this makes it a time to reflect (or perhaps to
checkpoint) on life at Mozilla. This anniversary falls at a good time.
As most people know, we're releasing Firefox 3 in the next few days.
This is something that has been a long time in coming but I've been
pretty happy working on the alphas and betas of this over the last year.
Most of my day to day life is centered on the ongoing security updates
for Firefox and Thunderbird though. I'm currently running the QA efforts
at MoCo for these releases, ably assisted by a cluster of malcontents
within the QA organization. The next security update for Firefox 2 will
be version 2.0.0.15, which we just began testing on Friday.
Unfortunately, security is an ongoing process, as is bug discovery, so
this will not be the last release. In the future, at least for a while,
we'll be updating both Firefox 2 and 3 at the same time, which ought to
make things especially interesting. On the security front, I'll be going
to [DEFCON](http://www.defcon.org/) and [Black
Hat](http://www.blackhat.com/) this year and will also be attending the
25th annual [Chaos Communications
Congress](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaos_Communication_Congress) in
Berlin during the holiday season at the end of the year. I'm hoping to
get to chat more with those in the community that gives us notice of
security issues, often in such creative ways. All in all, I'm pretty
happy with the year that I've spent at Mozilla. I'm looking forward to
the work on [GristMill](http://wiki.mozilla.org/QA/TDAI/MozMillTestTool)
getting to a beta level of quality as it has the potential to be a game
changer for the day to day life of those of us in QA. GristMill is a
tool being worked on largely by Clint Talbert and Mikeal Rogers that
allows test automation to be built on the Mozilla platform in an easy
manner. This is a tool written specifically for QA usage. Initially,
this work is targeted to Firefox but it should be applicable to any
product built on the platform and will also work on all supported
operating systems. Finding a tool to do test automation that both tests
Firefox and Thunderbird as a whole (including UI features) and which is
cross platform is something that I've been making a lot of noise about
within our QA team for the entire time that I've been here. I'm glad
that we have superstar developers on the QA team that can make this tool
a reality. This will move us in the direction of having better
automation, which can be extended by the community, for software built
on the Mozilla platform. I'm not sure what the next year will hold. I
hope that with the release of Firefox 3, we have a chance to sit back
and evaluate how we want to do things, especially within the QA team,
for the future releases. It is easy to get caught up in the day to day
tactical issues for releases. I expect to play a role in all of this.
Until then, I have Firefox and Thunderbird releases to get out the door
in the next few weeks.
