---
author: admin
date: '2008-01-14 00:08:10'
layout: post
slug: the-economics-of-gangs-and-urban-poor
status: publish
title: The Economics of Gangs and Urban Poor
wordpress_id: '2157'
categories:
- Society
---

[![gangcover](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2006/2192174618_1184665a2e_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2192174618/ "gangcover by albill, on Flickr")NPR
has a story that they broadcasted on Dr. Sudhir Venkatesh this last
Saturday for his new book, **[Gang Leader for a
Day](http://www.amazon.com/Gang-Leader-Day-Sociologist-Streets/dp/1594201501/)**.
You can [listen to it
online](http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=18003654).
Most of it is an interview with Dr. Venkatesh and it is quite
interesting to listen to if you have the time. Dr. Venkatesh discusses
his experiences, which are detailed in the book, in developing a
relationship with the "Black Kings," a Chicago gang that dealt drugs in
some of the projects. I've very much been looking forward to this book
coming out for a while now. I read one of Dr. Venkatesh's previous
books, "**[Off the Books: The Underground Economy of the Urban
Poor](http://www.amazon.com/Off-Books-Underground-Economy-Urban/dp/0674023552)**".
That book documented the largely underground (off the books...) economy
in the same area of Chicago that he lived and worked within while
studying the Black Kings. I found it to be a pretty sensitive and
nuanced book with a lot of insight. Dr. Venkatesh really does care about
the lives of these people and gets to know them in a way that almost no
academic would ever be interested in doing, even if they were able to do
so. I'm also reading the book, "**[The Gangs of New York: An Informal
History of the
Underworld](http://www.amazon.com/Gangs-New-York-Informal-Underworld/dp/1560252758/)**",
right now. This is the 1928 book that detailed the heyday of the New
York City gangs in all of their terrible and awesome glory (and inspired
the movie of the same name). It will be interesting to see how very
different the gangs of today are from those of the previous era, when
they had political support as well as a financial basis of a different
sort. I expect that there are commonalities as well. Dr. Steven Levitt
did a talk at [TED](http://www.ted.com) in 2004, which you can view
below or on the [page for
it](http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/view/id/29). This talk covers
some of the same research with the Black Kings and wound up in Levitt's
book,
"**[Freakonomics](http://www.amazon.com/Freakonomics-Revised-Expanded-Economist-Everything/dp/0061234001/)**",
and Dr. Levitt discusses Dr. Venkatesh's experiences and things learned
in an interesting manner. The talk focuses on the economics of the gang
and their business model but is, in my opinion, woefully brief. I would
have loved to have heard much more.
You can actually read the official publication of much of this research,
if you you are interested. It is "**[An Economic Analysis of a
Drug-Selling Gang's
Finances](http://pricetheory.uchicago.edu/levitt/Papers/LevittVenkateshAnEconomicAnalysis2000.pdf)**"
by Steven Levitt and Sudhir Venkatesh. There is an amazing amount of
material in all of this. I wonder what other potential areas of research
there are here but, beyond that, I wonder how people like Sudhir
Venkatesh can take this kind of work and influence society in a positive
manner with it. He learned things, effectively by both getting lucky and
by treating people like actual human beings, that others have not come
close to before. If we had more people doing work like this and people
paying attention to it, we might begin to address some of the problems
that our society is having in real ways. It is obvious that the problems
that give rise to, for example, gangs and the drug trade, are not simply
going to go away, nor are those of the urban poor. It is hopeful to see
people tackling these issues in new ways and actually interacting with
people as they lives their lives.
