---
author: admin
date: '2008-09-29 13:21:12'
layout: post
slug: egyptophilia
status: publish
title: Egyptophilia
wordpress_id: '2508'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

[![Thebes
Engraving](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3135/2899154539_2e40a9f80f.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2899154539/ "Thebes Engraving by albill, on Flickr")

Or is it "Aeqyptophilia" in better faux Latin? On Friday, R and I leave
for Egypt for something like 11 days of travel there. On the advice of
some good friends of ours, Denny and Sophia, who have been there, we're
going to travel through a local, Egyptian-based, tour company that they
used. It's one of these fly by night, cash exchanged from cars, kind of
outfits but they had a great time with the outfit and they seem fairly
reliable. They actually are picking us up at the airport in Cairo even
though we don't start the tour with them for two days after that. We'll
have to figure out what to do in those two days (or probably day and
change with jetlag and such). Since we're already going to the big
Egyptian museum and seeing the pyramids with the tour guys (aka "the
Egyptian Mafia"), we probably won't do things like that. We're open to
suggestions though. Our itinerary right now is: **Oct 04**: Arrival to
Cairo airport (near midnight), then transfer to the hotel, overnight in
Cairo. **Oct 05**: Free day, overnight in Cairo. **Oct 06**: Free day,
overnight in Cairo. **Oct 07**: Desert Tour to visit Memphis, Sakkara,
Giza Pyramids & Sphinx, include lunch, at Evening transfer to Train
station, overnight on Sleeper train to Aswan. **Oct 08**: Arrival to
Aswan, Embark the Nile Cruiser, Boat orientation, tour by Felucca ride
to visit Botanical Gardens & Elephantine Islands, afternoon visit to the
High Dam and Philae Temple, Sail to Kom Ombo, overnight on board. **Oct
09**: Visit Kom Ombo city & temple, sail to visit Edfu city & Temple,
then sailing to Luxor, overnight on board. **Oct 10**: Tour to visit
Luxor & Karnak Temples, overnight on board. **Oct 11**: Visit Valley of
Kings, Valley of Queens, Queen Hatshipsut temple, and two Colossi of
Memnon, checkout cruise, transfer to train station, overnight on Sleeper
train to Cairo. **Oct 12**: Arrival to Cairo in the morning, transfer to
the Hotel, City Tour to explore Egyptian Museum, Saladin Citadel, Coptic
old Cairo, old Churches, Jewish Synagogue & Bazaar, include lunch,
overnight in Cairo. **Oct 13**: Desert Safari, drive to Baharya oasis,
then drive through the desert to visit black desert, crystal mountain,
Salt lake in the Bedouin village, stop at Heiz oasis for lunch, then to
Agapat the flower stone area, hot spring, Mushroom mountain, Black
mountain, continue to the old white desert & the New White desert,
overnight Camping in the white desert. **Oct 14**: Drive back to oasis,
then Tour to visit Hot spring, Sandy hills & British castle, Drive back
to Cairo, overnight in Cairo. **Oct 15**: Transfer to airport for your
departure flight. If anyone has any tips for Egyptian travel, it isn't
too late to tell us. I've been told to be financially wary of the camel
drivers, especially, in Cairo. I'm told that you should expect to give
small amounts of money to people pretty much constantly for things. On
the way home, we're stopping by London for three days of high speed
tourism, including a long visit to the British Museum.
