---
author: admin
date: '2008-12-18 12:14:46'
layout: post
slug: past-sins-realized
status: publish
title: Past Sins Realized
wordpress_id: '2591'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

I must confess that this may very well be a narcissistic post on my part
but, then again, it's a blog and much of what goes on here and on other
blogs is pretty narcissistic. Perhaps I'll be excused then. From time to
time, I become especially aware of my past sins. These aren't dramatic
sins of any sort. I've never killed anyone, embezzled from my
corporation, or even abused a dog. These are the pedestrian sins that
many of us have had as none of us are perfect creatures. My biggest
failing, throughout my less, is my own selfishness. The second biggest
failing, that goes hand in hand with it, is self-absorption or a lack of
awareness of my own selfishness. In other words, I've often been a
selfish shit that only focused on myself and really did not treat other
people well. I say this in the past tense but I'm well aware that this
can no way be truly in the past. It still happens today though I hope
that it does so with some less frequency than in previous years. I'd
like to pretend that this is a failing of my young adulthood, 15 years
or more ago, but I can see it even within the last couple of years.
There are probably quite a few reasons to do with this behavior based on
my upbringing as a largely only child without good connections to others
but that is really quite immaterial. As adults, in spite of any reasons
for things, we have to take responsibility for our behaviors. You can't
point the finger at circumstances or people and say "It is not my
fault!" Of course it is your fault. You're the one engaging in the
behavior. This is not to say that I'm kicking myself over and over again
over this. I don't want to dwell on my selfishness because that, by its
very nature, is selfish as well beyond a certain point. It's a form of
ego clinging or self cherishing that serves no real value and can
actually damage your ability to move on and to help others or yourself.
I've simply become more aware of all of it over time when I look back at
things I've done. My motivation has, far too often, been about what is
nice or easy for me and without any awareness (or caring) of its effects
on others. I figure it is part of the inevitable process of maturation
and reflection that people do become aware of their behaviors and how
they impact people, especially the people close to them (though there
are notable exceptions with some people). Spending significant time on a
cushion at various points also makes it inevitable that you will see
something of the nature of your own mind or thoughts. You can't run from
yourself. This causes me some remorse when I ponder circumstances around
my first marriage, my relationship to family, and even my current
marriage and friends. So, for those long-term friends of mine who read
my posts, here and where they are mirrored on my old livejournal, I do
want to apologize for being a selfish bastard and, basically, being a
self-adsorbed asshole at times (or constantly). I've lost more friends
due to my own behavior than any other reason, something which saddens me
when I reflect on it. What is the antidote to selfishness? Well,
obviously awareness is a real key. Knowing your habits and mindsets can
help you be aware of habitual modes of behavior. Beyond that, the real
answer is to quit focusing on yourself. In our hyper-individualistic
American culture, it's all about me me me but, really, it's not about
me, for any of us. You aren't in a competition with people. Really,
you're not. It's not about being better off, richer, or having more
stuff than others. That way leads to dissatisfaction and suffering.
Maybe not now but eventually. You don't become happy by focusing on
yourself. In my opinion, the real key to happiness is focusing outward
to others, rather than constantly inwards. Focus on your relationships
with other beings. Focus on helping others or just being connected with
them, understanding **their** circumstances and lives. It isn't ignoring
your own happiness but there is a huge difference between meeting your
own basic needs as a human being and focusing on them to the point where
others are inconsequential or simply a means to your own personal ends.
The happiest people I know do things to meet their basic needs to have
some joy in their life but then they are involved with others, helping
them be happy as well, being compassionate and just a bit less ego
driven. In many ways, it is antithetical to our current culture but it
is true. This isn't even a Buddhist thing as I've known plenty of happy
Christians, Jews, Muslims, Atheists or what-have-you. It **is** a matter
of reducing the clinging to your own ego or self as the most important
thing in the world. Personally, I wish I would have realized this 15 or
20 years ago but then, I'm sure I wouldn't have cared then either. This
strikes me as something that people need to intuit for themselves, even
if others can help point it out.
