---
author: admin
date: '2008-08-21 23:37:08'
layout: post
slug: neal-stephensons-anathem-reviewed
status: publish
title: Neal Stephensons "Anathem" Reviewed
wordpress_id: '2402'
categories:
- Books
- Science Fiction
---

[![anathem](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3003/2608432235_51f3eabb6d_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2608432235/ "anathem by albill, on Flickr")
I finished Neal Stephenson's new novel,
**[Anathem](http://www.amazon.com/Anathem-Neal-Stephenson/dp/0061474096)**,
this evening. This is scheduled to hit the stores on September 9, 2008.
Like most of Stephenson's novels (outside of his first few), it is a
mighty tome. It is 890 pages long plus a glossary and several
supplements where he unloads some of the math and theory. As I recall,
he either started adding these in the
**[Cryptonomicon](http://www.amazon.com/Cryptonomicon-Neal-Stephenson/dp/0060512806/)**
or the **[Baroque Cycle](http://www.amazon.com/gp/series/90841/)**. I
assume that the theory loads down the narrative a bit too much and he is
wisely moving these bits out (while not having the strength of will
necessary to remove them, as some might wish). This points out the main
weakness of this book, which is its density, which approaches that of a
black hole at times. (Fortunately, it isn't a "dry" density...) This is
something that was evident in the other works mentioned above as well
and, really, it is one of those things that you either accept with
Stephenson's work or you find irritating. If the latter is true, I
recommend that you simply quit reading him as it seems quite unlikely to
change given the last five works that he has written. I do find it
somewhat amusing that the man who wrote **[Snow
Crash](http://www.amazon.com/Snow-Crash-Bantam-Spectra-Book/dp/0553380958/)**,
a second generation cyberpunk action novel, has, at the other end of the
arc of his writing career, written what amounts to, in many ways, a
Neoplatonic Space Opera of Mighty Weight. While I did find **Anathem**
to be quite lengthy, I have wisely made peace with this aspect of
Stephenson's work and managed to enjoy the depth that it allows him to
provide. (At this point, anyone who is a fan of the **Wheel of Time**
series who is bitching about Stephenson needs to shut it.) Unlike my
criticisms of some of his previous work, I do not feel like he ran out
of steam two-thirds of the way through writing **Anathem**, causing him
to rush his ending. In fact, I found the ending to be quite strong and
that it reached the kind of conclusion, both for plots and for our
protagonist, that made sense to me. I am going to avoid spoilers for
this work but I do want to discuss it a bit since this is a review.
**Anathem** is set on the world of Arbre and opens in the year 3,689.
The dating is especially relevant (and a timeline is provided) because
the main character, Erasmas, is a member of an order of cloistered
monastics that counts its founding in current form from the year zero.
This order (and its sister orders in the system in which it
participates) are not religious per se. They ultimately derive from a
Pythagorus-like founder roughly seven thousand of years before the
present. It is clear throughout the book that the history and content of
these orders have clear borrowings from the Ancient Greek philosophers
(in spirit if not in the fictional history of Arbre). If one files off
the serial numbers of much of the philosophy within **Anathem** (and
there is quite a bit discussed), one can recognize various strains of
Platonism, Neopythorean, and other Greek philosophical thought. One
primary difference is that the orders (the "mathic world") have managed,
with varying degrees of success, to survive from ancient times while the
rest of the world goes through periods of civilization, barbarism, and
even nuclear conflicts. Over the course of the book, the reasons for the
structures of the cloisters, their 10,000 year clocks, and their
isolation from the world (voluntary or otherwise) becomes clear. In many
ways, they act as the repositories of knowledge for the rest of world
(with not always pleasant implications). The book description states in
part:

> Fraa Erasmas is a young avout living in the Concent of Saunt Edhar, a
> sanctuary for mathematicians, scientists, and philosophers, protected
> from the corrupting influences of the outside "saecular" world by
> ancient stone, honored traditions, and complex rituals. Over the
> centuries, cities and governments have risen and fallen beyond the
> concent's walls. Three times during history's darkest epochs violence
> born of superstition and ignorance has invaded and devastated the
> cloistered mathic community. Yet the avout have always managed to
> adapt in the wake of catastrophe, becoming out of necessity even more
> austere and less dependent on technology and material things. And
> Erasmas has no fear of the outside—the Extramuros—for the last of the
> terrible times was long, long ago.

The first third of the book sets the stage for Erasmas, who is roughly
18, as a novitiate in the order and the world within the cloister. Of
course, dramatic events cause the scope of the book to expand
dramatically but this first section, as long as many novels, does set
the tone for our narrator and his life. While Stephenson does
occasionally insert definitions of terms in chapter beginnings or
otherwise explains a bit of history through exposition, things really
only become clear in bits in pieces that last right up to the end of the
text. Since I am a Classics geek by background and a former Neoplatonist
of sorts, I found the Classical philosophy, discussions related to it,
and their sidetracks, to be engaging and interesting. I am also
decidedly pro-monastic (though normally in a Buddhist mode). I am of a
mixed mind as to whether others would feel the same level of engagements
and interest. You'll probably have to wait for a reviewer with a
different sort of background in order to find out if this setting and
the philosophizing is as engaging to others or is, perhaps, distracting
and confusing. I could easily see it both ways. Overall, I found the
work to be a lot more cohesive and immediate than much of the **Baroque
Cycle**. I think that this is primarily because there is a single
narrator, Erasmas, who draws it all together rather than the multiple
viewpoint characters of the **Baroque Cycle**, which amplified some of
the chaos in that trilogy with their shifting of viewpoints between
sections of the same book, only to draw the narratives together in an
entirely different volume of the series. I also appreciated the vision
of stability and sustainability provided by the mathic world, which I
know was partially inspired by some of the visions of the [Long Now
Foundation](http://longnow.org/) and its own planned 10,000 year clock.
Stephenson will be speaking there [on September
9](http://www.longnow.org/anathem/) as part of his book launch in San
Francisco, so the inspiration is quite overt on his part. (I am a
charter member of the foundation so I may have a bias towards its ideals
to add to all of my other biases.) There were issues around the
practicality of this vision here and there (for example, How do the Ita
maintain their stability over centuries when they aren't monastics?) but
I think they were minor given the scope of the work. Overall, I found
**Anathem** to be an engaging read. It was engrossing enough to keep me
up until 2:00 AM on a number of nights, just wanting to finish the next
chapter. There are not many novels that can do that to me. I think that
if people are looking for a "light" or simply "fun" read, that they may
not find it enjoyable to the same degree. It is a heavy book with lots
of philosophical debates within it, as well as exposition on various
philosophical principles at some length, and it has very little action
to grease the plot. There are no Shaftoe pirate battles or tomfoolery in
this one though Stephenson's humor is very much present. I expect that
those who enjoyed the **Baroque Cycle** will enjoy **Anathem** as well
(and the reverse is true also). One additional note in regard to the CD
that came with the book. As [I had mentioned when I received the
book](http://www.arcanology.com/2008/06/24/anathem-and-music/), this CD
contains music, all done with only human voices, from the world of
Anathem (with songs like "Sixteen Color Prime Generating Automation").
These are songs sung by the monastics and contain a mix of chant and
song that sound Western as well as some that are clearly derived from
the throat singing present in Tibetan Buddhist monasteries. The reasons
for some of this variation actually become a little clearer in the text
and I found the CD to be an interesting accompaniment to the reading
experience. David Stutz, who composed the music for the CD, which is
named "**IOLET: Music from the World of Anathem**", wrote to me about
the status of the CD. He states that an extended version of the CD will
be released when **Anathem** comes out. The version of the CD that came
with the advanced reader's copy of the book was a shorter, preliminary
version. Proceeds from the sale of the CD will go to the Long Now
Foundation mentioned above. You can find more information on Stutz's
[page for the music](http://synthesist.net/music/anathem/). He also had
an [rss feed](http://synthesist.net/tunes/scores/iolet.xml) which
contains sheet music for the CD. An example of this for the song,
"**Proof Using Finite Projective Geometry**", is
[here](http://www.synthesist.net/tunes/scores/FiniteProjectiveGeometry-DavidStutz.pdf)
Additionally, there is a [preliminary
page](http://monastic.org/orth/language.html) on the language, Orth,
which is language used by the mathic world, filling the role of Latin as
the language of monastics and ancient knowledge in our world.
**Update:** [Boing Boing](http://www.boingboing.net) has [provided an
excerpt from the
glossary](http://www.boingboing.net/images/x_2008/anathem_dictionary_sampling.pdf)
of **Anathem** in PDF format. I have also updated the post with more
information on the musical CD that came with the book.
