---
author: admin
date: '2008-12-09 12:59:06'
layout: post
slug: buddhist-visits
status: publish
title: Buddhist Visits
wordpress_id: '2577'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

On a different note than my personal health battles, I did want to
mention a couple of items of interest. On Sunday, when I was feeling
pretty well, I met with Ed, a newly arrived Zen priest who only lives a
few blocks away from me. Ed is a member of the [Boundless Way
Zen](http://www.boundlesswayzen.org/) organization, which is actively
primarily in New England. James Ford, who has an active
[blog](http://monkeymindonline.blogspot.com/) presence, is one of the
heads of this organization and I've had some correspondence with him
over time online. He put me in touch with Ed, who moved to the Bay Area
back in August. Ed and I sat and chatted on a variety of topics,
especially local Zen groups and where to sit, for a few hours. It was
nice to get to chat in person with someone with similar interests. Ed
has a lot more experience than me and it was interesting to hear his
perspective on things. I expect that he and I will be chatting again in
the future. He also gave me some recommendations on groups to sit with
that also had a nice community of people associated with them. I largely
practice alone or with my wife on occasion and the lack of a community
of fellow travelers is something that has almost always been missing in
my practice. I've never had a local group that I was well enmeshed with,
either here or back in Seattle, since I began practicing Buddhism. I've
had online friends, even groups of them, but it is still a rather
abstract connection when it comes to fellowship. It is nice to be around
people who are doing what you are doing or at least understand and
participate in practice. Aside from visiting with Rev. Ed, I managed to
visit two temples in Salt Lake City when R and I went out there (with my
daughter) to visit my mother over Thanksgiving. Mom wanted me to have a
chance to visit some places of interest. We visited [Urgyen Samten
Ling](http://urgyensamtenling.org/), a Tibetan Buddhist temple of the
Nyingma tradition, and the [Kanzeon Zen
Center](http://www.bigmind.org/Campus~.html), a Soto Zen temple run by
Dennis Genpo Merzel. Urgyen Samten Ling has a very nice space that
reminded me strongly of Orgyen Dorje Den in Alameda locally. It is a
converted stake house, a kind of Mormon church building, that had
apparently been a dance club at some point. They've completely
refurbished the interior and also had a nice martial arts studio in the
downstairs space.

[![Urgyen Samten Ling Shrine
Room](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3175/3071241603_56fc71e6d2.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3071241603/ "Urgyen Samten Ling Shrine Room")

We ran into one of the senior practitioners there (whose name I forget!)
and she very nicely spoke with us about the space, the group, their
teacher, etc. Coincidentally, my mother ran into her and their lama a
few days later near her work and had a chat with them again. It turns
out that he knows some Shingon priests in Japan.

[![Kanzeon Zen
Center](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3231/3071256255_3f1c35f1c0.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3071256255/ "Kanzeon Zen Center by albill, on Flickr")

Kanzeon Zen Center operates out of a refurbished house in downtown Salt
Lake City. They also have another house next door where their
priests/monks live and have some kind of presence (perhaps ownership) of
an apartment building on the other side as well. It's a pretty big set
of spaces. Kanzeon has some controversy associated with it because their
primary teacher, Rev. Genpo, incorporates a set of modern psychological
techniques into a method that he calls "Big Mind." He also runs fairly
highly priced retreats around the world. That being said, the teachings
that I've seen him do (through recordings) on traditional Zen have not
appeared untoward to me so I have reserved any judgement on such
matters. The main room in the zendo for sitting is fairly large in that
it is most of the second floor of the house but is much smaller than
some spaces that I've been in, such as the Berkeley Zen Center's zendo
or the one at Green Gulch in Marin. One thing that I found to be very
interesting is that along with a picture of Rev. Genpo's teacher, Taizan
Maezumi Roshi, on the altar, there was also one of Chogyam Trungpa
Rinpoche, a Tibetan Kagyu teacher who also founded the Shambhala
Buddhist tradition here in America. I've never heard of a connection
with Chogyam Trungpa and Kanzeon before though I do know that Chogyam
Trungpa did cultivate connections with Zen teachers during his life.

[![Closeup of Altar at Kanzeon Zen
Center](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3200/3072103264_23b941bd2d.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3072103264/ "Closeup of Altar at Kanzeon Zen Center by albill, on Flickr")

It was nice to get a chance to visit these two places while in Salt Lake
City. It is pretty interesting to me to see how groups establish
themselves and their temples here in the United States after having
visited temples in Japan and Thailand.
