---
author: admin
date: '2008-04-06 17:24:50'
layout: post
slug: la-boheme
status: publish
title: La Bohème
wordpress_id: '2202'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

[![Boheme.jpeg](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3173/2393688155_a489e8e989_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2393688155/ "Boheme.jpeg by albill, on Flickr")
Today, R and I went with her mother and a couple of other family members
to see a high definition broadcast of Puccini's [**La
Bohème**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La_bohème) at a local theatre.
This was part of a series of broadcasts of opera all over the country.
[The Metropolitan Opera](http://www.metoperafamily.org/metopera/) of New
York City began doing live broadcasts of operas in 2006 to selected
theaters in the United States and, now, beyond. (You can find
information on this
[here](http://www.metoperafamily.org/metopera/broadcast/hd_events.aspx).)
One of the nice things about these broadcasts, which helps make up for
not being there in person, is that you are able to be very close to the
actors and their singing as the various cameras are right there around
them. While the sound would undoubtably be better live (it is hard to
make up for being in person) it was well done and we were able to see
everything well. Another facet of these broadcasts, which some people
will probably hate, is that there are discrete subtitles at the bottom.
Since my Italian is not so good, I actually enjoy this as the witty and
ribald songs are much more fun when you can follow them closely and not
just in a general sense. The production for this particular show was
done by the famous Franco Zeffirelli and the cast included Angela
Gheorghiu, Ainhoa Arteta, Ramón Vargas, Ludovic Tézier, Quinn Kelsey,
Oren Gradus, and Paul Plishka. There is a [cast
sheet](http://www.metoperafamily.org/metupload/hd/LaBoheme.pdf) with a
synopsis available as well if you are not familiar with this opera.
Rodolfo, the male lead, was played by [Ramón
Vargas](http://ramonvargas.com/). We had seen him a year ago when we
attended another broadcast (as part of the same overall program) when he
played one of the main roles in [Eugene
Onegin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugene_Onegin_(opera)). I'm
becoming quite fond of him after these two performances as I've been
blown away by his singing and acting. Below, I've included a [Youtube
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsTO8e-e0rY) of a segment of "La
Bohème" with the role of Rodolfo played by Jose Carreras.


