---
author: admin
date: '2008-06-17 00:44:20'
layout: post
slug: shunryu-suzuki-and-my-father-in-law
status: publish
title: Shunryu Suzuki and my Father-in-law
wordpress_id: '2242'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Notable People
- Spirituality
---

[![Shunryu
Suzuki](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3071/2586845252_b26639abbf_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2586845252/ "Shunryu Suzuki by albill, on Flickr")

One interesting thing came up this weekend when we were at Green Gulch
Farm. My father-in-law, Leon, came along with us and we had a chance to
chat a bit here and there. I had been told in previous years, in a vague
way, that he had done some sitting meditation previously but there
hadn't been many details given. He doesn't make much small talk so I'm
not surprised. While we were there at Green Gulch, Leon went to a
meditation session without the rest of us. He mentioned to me over
dinner later that, based on something that was said, he thought that the
place had something to do with a teacher, Suzuki. I told him that, yes,
it was part of the San Francisco Zen Center and that had been founded by
Shunryu Suzuki. Leon then told me that he'd studied for about six months
with a zen teacher named "Suzuki" in 1962. He said that the group had
met near Japantown in San Francisco in a building that was a converted
synagogue (which probably stayed in the memory of my father-in-law since
he's Jewish). Later this same day, Leon mentioned that he'd seen a photo
of the same teacher in the library upstairs, which is where I had
noticed a picture of Suzuki Roshi earlier as well. On getting back to
town, I checked [wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shunryu_Suzuki)
and other information that I had about Suzuki's history. It turns out
that he came over in 1959 from Japan. He was brought to America to be a
priest at Soko-ji, the only Soto Zen temple in San Francisco, which
served the Japanese community. Soko-ji was, unsurprisingly now, in a
converted Jewish synagogue. There is a picture of the temple in
**[Crooked
Cucumber](http://www.amazon.com/Crooked-Cucumber-Teaching-Shunryu-Suzuki/dp/0767901053/)**,
which is a biography of Suzuki. It was on Bush street and looked like a
synagogue, not a Japanese Buddhist temple, so no work was done to
convert the exterior. At this location in 1960, Suzuki Roshi did the
first sesshin (a three day one) ever held in North America and began to
take on more and more non-Japanese students. (I have elsewhere been told
that this caused a bit of trouble as members of the Japanese community
were not entirely pleased with this turn of events at the time.) In
1961, [Richard
Baker](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zentatsu_Richard_Baker), who was
Suzuki Roshi's later successor and the founder of Green Gulch Farm,
showed up and began to study with Suzuki Roshi. (As an aside, a friend
of Baker's, who was hanging around with him in [Fields Book
Store](http://www.fieldsbooks.com) having a discussion, sent Baker to
see Suzuki. Fields is currently owned by a friendly acquaintance of mine
who is probably reading this...) [Philip
Kapleau](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip_Kapleau), who became very
well known later on, showed up in January, 1962, for a visit which he
wrote about in a Zen newsletter, **Wind Bell**. It was only in the later
1960s that the new center (now called the "[City
Center](http://sfzc.org/cc/)") was purchased and Suzuki Roshi left
Soko-ji. So, it turns out that my father-in-law was sitting at Soko-ji
and studying with Suzuki Roshi at the same time as Richard Baker and a
number of the other early movers and shakers in American Zen. The funny
thing is that Leon did not know that Suzuki Roshi was famous or had gone
on to seriously kickstart Zen in the non-Japanese population here in the
United States. Leon was flipping through **[Zen Mind, Beginner's
Mind](http://www.amazon.com/Zen-Mind-Beginners-Informal-Meditation/dp/B0019F1PB8/)**,
a collection of Suzuki's talks on Zen, and he'd never seen it before and
had no idea it was one of the most influential books in Zen Buddhism in
the West. I asked Leon what had happened and why he had quit going
there. He said that he'd sat often for about six months, riding out with
a friend who had a car. He'd attended the Saturday meals, he said, which
happened with the sitting, but he wound up moving out of San Francisco
(to Berkeley, where he lives now, I assume). Since he had no car and
this was before BART, he had simply stopped going. He didn't really have
a lot to say about it and I didn't want to pry overly but what a strange
connection. To have been with Suzuki Roshi at that time, at the very
beginning of such an influential change, and then to not even know about
all of the things that had happened in the 46 years since then. It was
an odd thing to come out during this weekend, that's for sure.
