---
author: admin
date: '2008-06-15 18:28:51'
layout: post
slug: green-gulch
status: publish
title: Green Gulch Visit
wordpress_id: '2241'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

R and I just got back from spending most of the weekend up at [Green
Gulch Farm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_Gulch_Farm). It is also
known as "Soryu-ji" or "Green Dragon Temple." Green Gulch is a Zen
center operated by the [San Francisco Zen
Center](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/San_Francisco_Zen_Center), which
also has a retreat property called
[Tassajara](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tassajara_Zen_Mountain_Center)
further south. Green Gulch is over in Sausalito, not far from the Muir
Woods and near Muir Beach. It is a wooded gulch (hence the name) that
starts out fairly narrow near the high, inland, portion, and gradually
widens out a bit into gardens and fields. Green Gulch is known for its
work in organic agriculture and teaches classes in that as well as more
"normal" Zen activities. R and I had been wanting to go there for a
while but hadn't really gotten around to it. R's mother wound up
suggesting that we all go out there and made reservations for us. We all
went out yesterday morning and R and I spent the night in the guesthouse
there. While there, we ate meals with the residents (which was wonderful
organic vegetarian food, much of it grown there). We spent Saturday
wandering around the grounds, visiting the zendo, the gardens, and R and
I wandered down to Muir Beach for a bit. (I managed to turn myself into
a redneck with my sunburn from this...) This morning, after breakfast, R
and I attended a class with R's parents that was an introduction to
meditation. R's mother had never meditated before. We then did the
morning session with the residents and all of the others that come on
Sundays and then listened to a teaching by the roshi there. After lunch,
we headed on back to town. This is my first time visiting a large Zen
site in America. I went to plenty in Japan but had never gone to a place
where the property was dedicated to the group before now. People have
been living at Green Gulch for around 36 years, so it has quite a bit of
history at this point. There is a beautiful bell there dating from the
founding of the temple:

[![Bell Name -
Closeup](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3011/2582259510_b33c3849fb.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2582259510/ "Bell Name - Closeup by albill, on Flickr")

The buildings were clustered pretty close in a hilly area, connected by
paths and stairs up and down hills and a few walkways between buildings.
The architecture was a mix of Japanese influences (in the covered
walkways, for example) and a kind of rural American style.

[![Wheelwright Center -
2](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3052/2581441265_42abda14d9.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2581441265/ "Wheelwright Center - 2 by albill, on Flickr")

The zendo was surrounded by a typical wooden walkway but, unlike in
Japan, this wasn't raised above the ground for the most part (making the
transition to shoeless walking a bit arbitrary in places).

[![Zendo Door with
Tree](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3142/2581297365_390368fb00.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2581297365/ "Zendo Door with Tree by albill, on Flickr")\
*Zendo with Tree*

Attached to one end of the zendo was "Cloud Mountain Hall," which was a
boxy building where most of the monastics live. Like the guesthouse, it
had a large open area in the center of the building with rooms and
walkways facing inwards towards it.

[![Great Cloud Hall -
Interior](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3099/2581438413_f3b38ca570.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2581438413/ "Great Cloud Hall - Interior by albill, on Flickr")

The zendo was large and obviously well loved. In many ways, the gardens
of the place were the most amazing thing. They are beautifully
maintained and clearly well loved, with bright flowers woven into
trestles and sitting areas around small outdoor shrines.

[![DSCF3707.JPG](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3108/2581324199_cf9c9dcc10.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2581324199/ "DSCF3707.JPG by albill, on Flickr")\
*flowers in one of four gates*

[![Small Jizo
Shrine](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3044/2582140996_f3af24bea4.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2582140996/ "Small Jizo Shrine by albill, on Flickr")\
*Jizo Shrine*

I've put a [photoset up on
Flickr](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157605628622900/) of
the pictures I took this weekend. I expect that there will be more in a
couple of weeks as I've been invited to a friend's wedding event out
there on the 28th, which happened coincidentally to all of this.
**Update:** I just realized that the roshi that taught today was
[Tenshin Zenki Reb
Anderson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tenshin_Reb_Anderson). He is the
former abbot of the San Francisco Zen Center and is the first,
apparently, to receive Dharma Transmission from [Richard
Baker](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zentatsu_Richard_Baker), who was the
one who founded Green Gulch Farm (Baker is also famous for being the
first American Zen Master ousted by his own temple...). I had caught the
teacher's Dharma name today but not his full name but I realized who he
was once I saw his full name on wikipedia as I actually bought a book of
his today at the Green Gulch bookstore.
