---
author: admin
date: '2008-05-26 01:20:13'
layout: post
slug: paper-finished-and-summer-plans
status: publish
title: Paper Finished and Summer Plans
wordpress_id: '2229'
categories:
- Academic
- Daily Life
---

[![taizokai-vairocana](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2329/2523155407_482e157abd.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2523155407/ "taizokai-vairocana by albill, on Flickr")

I finished the first full and largely complete draft of my term paper
for my esoteric Buddhism class today. It came in at 28 pages but one
must remember, since we're using footnotes for citations, that anywhere
from a half to full inch at the bottom of many pages is taken up by
footnotes. The paper is off with my editor now (which means that my wife
consented to look at it and catch the typos that I haven't caught after
ten minor redrafts for some reason and to see if it reads like a real
paper). Once it gets past her and any mistakes she finds, I'll send it
in. With that, I'm done with this class and just in time for Summer!
This summer is shaping up to be fairly busy. I'm still quietly doing an
online course with the Buddhist group that I work with for our education
program. Those will continue one after the other. R and I took a little
time off today and drove down to Half Moon Bay to go horseback riding. I
hadn't been on a horse since I was a kid (which is shameful since my
dad's family owned a horse ranch of sorts in Wyoming). R had done horse
camp as a kid but that was a long while ago. We did an hour and a half
trail ride with a guide along the ocean, which was rather nice. I spent
much of my ride trying to convince my horse, Chico, to quit eating
flowers and shoots and to keep moving along. I had the "no riding
experience" horse so he pretty much did what he wanted much of the time.
I'm glad we went but my ass is pretty sore right now. I would like to do
some more riding in the future though this wasn't particularly cheap to
do. Beyond my continuing education work, R and I found out that
Emeryville (which is a block West of us) has a [Taiko
dojo](http://www.etaiko.org/) with regular open classes. Since we're
both interested in drumming (especially Taiko) and like joint
activities, we'll probably try out the classes there when the new series
begins in two weeks. Learn to drum the Japanese way! They have their own
Youtube channel as well if you want to see the local group in action.
We're going to Seattle next week, where I'll be seeing the Karmapa in
his rockstar tour of the United States, as well as my daughter,
grandparents and a few friends. At the end of July, I'm going to Canada
for a week for the [Mozilla Summit](http://wiki.mozilla.org/Summit2008)
with my co-workers. I'll come back from that for four or so days and
then head off to Las Vegas [Black Hat](http://www.blackhat.com/) and
[Defcon](http://www.defcon.org/), again for work (since I'm the QA lead
for security releases). At the end of August, R and I will be going to
[Burning Man](http://www.burningman.com) again. I went last in 2006 (she
in 2001) and we're looking forward to it. Oh, and we are planning our
Fall vacation trip (when we normally try to travel) to Egypt for late
September or October for a couple of weeks.
