---
author: admin
date: '2009-03-10 14:38:28'
layout: post
slug: review_of_two_recent_novels
status: publish
title: A review of two recent novels
wordpress_id: '2702'
categories:
- Books
- Science Fiction
---

[![Caryatids](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3356/3345286652_210ce0b542_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3345286652/ "Caryatids by albill, on Flickr")
I recently purchased and read two new books by well known science
fiction authors. These were **[The
Caryatids](http://www.amazon.com/Caryatids-Bruce-Sterling/dp/0345460626/)**
by Bruce Sterling and **[Cyberabad
Days](http://www.amazon.com/Cyberabad-Days-Ian-McDonald/dp/1591026997/)**
by Ian McDonald. The second of these is a collection of short stories
and a novella set in the India of 2047 that was the location for
McDonald's novel, **[River of
Gods](http://www.amazon.com/River-Gods-Ian-McDonald/dp/1591025958/)**.
They expand upon the story of that novel in places and also provide more
of a view of this vision of the subcontinent. (In fact, the collection
will spoil the novel in many ways if you read them before reading the
novel...) **River of Gods** was one of my favorite novels of the last
few years so I've been waiting to read this for quite some time. I found
the stories literally beautiful and very moving in their portrayal of
seemingly real people trying to survive. McDonald is one of my favorite
authors and his skills just grow over time. The only other author
writing short stories in science fiction dealing with similar issues and
tone is Paolo Bacigalupi in his collection, **[Pump Six and Other
Stories](http://www.amazon.com/Pump-Other-Stories-Paolo-Bacigalupi/dp/159780133X/)**
(which is also one of the finest short story collections that I've read
recently). **Cyberabad Days** lived up to my expectations in every way
and I recommend it to everyone (but you should read **River of Gods**
first). This is a "run, don't walk" collection in my opinion.
[![Cyberabad
Days](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3611/3345286630_300fa92aba_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3345286630/ "Cyberabad Days by albill, on Flickr")
I was prepared to be just as pleased by the new Bruce Sterling novel,
his first in four years (I believe). Early readers who had advanced
reader copies had been recommending it and Bruce Sterling is, hands
down, in my top five when it comes to authors. "St. Bruce," I have
called him. Unfortunately, while **The Caryatids** is a very
*interesting* book and has many cool ideas, I found that I really didn't
like it. I liked the cool ideas, the tech, some of the scenes, etc. but
the novel as a whole really just didn't pull together. I found the main
character(s) (the cloned sisters) basically insane (in many different
ways) and unsympathetic in the extreme. The world as portrayed was as
complex and strange as I would expect but when I compare it to Sterling
classics like
**[Distraction](http://www.amazon.com/Distraction-Bruce-Sterling/dp/0553576399/)**,
it just didn't hold together. When I got done with it, unlike McDonald's
collection, my reaction wasn't "Wow, I've got to get my friends to read
this!" but "Wow, what the fuck did I just read?! Is that it?" I'm not
sure what kind of message Sterling was trying to give in the book,
though I have the edges of it, but it just didn't evoke emotion and a
sense of place in me in the same way as McDonald's vision of India. So,
at the end, I must say that I feel that St. Bruce/Chairman Bruce wrote
an interesting book but a not terribly great novel. After years of
waiting, that leaves me a bit disappointed as I've been enjoying his
non-fiction and news commentary during the last few years. McDonald
continues to wow me and I can only hope that his next stories or novels
continue the growth that I've seen in him as an author since his first
novels.
