---
author: admin
date: '2009-10-16 22:24:40'
layout: post
slug: the-dharma-of-second-life
status: publish
title: The Dharma of Second Life
wordpress_id: '2881'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
- Technology
---

[![Five Mountain Zendo -
Interior](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2537/4015508029_9609cf105f.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4015508029/ "Five Mountain Zendo - Interior by albill, on Flickr")
In the last week, I have spent a bit of time in [Second
Life](http://secondlife.com/). For those who have been blissfully
unaware, Second Life is a virtual world simulator. Think World of
Warcraft but not as shiny and polished and, for the most part, not based
around the idea of a game. People do have game areas in it but it is
largely a creative chat medium. I looked around Second Life a few years
ago, found the software to be a bit buggy and the servers to be
unreliable, and quit bothering. It seemed like a big time sink (and it
still can be) without a lot of "there" there to bring me back. Just
recently, that has changed a bit. I've heard during the last few months
of a few Buddhist teachers running meetings in second life, doing
instruction, and generally talking to people there about the Dharma.
Earlier this week, I heard about
[Kannonji](http://kannonji.blogspot.com/), a virtual temple there. They
have a blog up and run meetings and meditation sessions at their temple
in second life every day. A day or so later, I found out that my own
teacher, [Jiun Foster](http://cincinnatizen.org/), was going to conduct
a teaching there this Saturday. In the course of setting that up and
meeting Rev. Jiun, the kind folks at Kannonji donated space on their
virtual land (which only exists because someone is paying a monthly rent
to keep it around) to the [Five Mountain
Order](http://www.five-mountain.org/), our Zen organization. This allows
us to have a virtual zendo there for group meetings and teachings as
well as interviews with teachers. As a result, I made a new SL account
and have spent a bit of time meeting the folks there. I'm actually quite
hopeful for it as tool for spreading the Dharma, especially amongst
folks who aren't near practitioners or are, perhaps, too shy to just
show up to a Dharma center and ask questions. If tens (hundreds?) of
thousands of people can play things like World of Warcraft, these same
people have computers beefy enough to log into Second Life. I've heard
at least one person ask me about the utility of Second Life when
compared to a flesh and blood sangha but, in many ways, that's apples
and oranges. A flesh and blood meeting with people, embodied in the
world, is not going to be the same as virtual meeting. That said, quite
a few groups of people are meeting over group voice chat, skype, and
other tools, in order to support each other in the Dharma. Second Life
is an additional tool in that sort of direction. One nice thing about SL
is that it supports voice, gestures, and a certain level of embodiment.
I'm doing koan work with two members of our organization now and we've
been experimenting with ways to work on koans when two of us (a student
and teacher) are not local to each other, which is the case for most
people in our order. The phone works fairly well. Skype with video, I am
told, also works quite well. Email can work though it isn't as
spontaneous. Rev. Jiun and I tried some koan work yesterday and found
that SL worked reasonbly well, though I expect video might nudge it out.
Since you can have private voice conversations in SL, gesture, and also
type text, it feels very practical. Does it replace meeting in person?
No, that is the gold standard, in a way, but we also live in an era of a
very distributed Dharma and the Five Mountain Order supports this with
our embrace of working with members who may not have a local sangha. The
[Five Mountain Buddhist Seminary](http://www.five-mountain.org/5MBS/),
as a distance-based Mahayana seminary, is another attempt at this. It
will be interesting to see where this all goes. The dork factor is a bit
high at times (and I did buy a flaming demon avatar shape and a
lightsaber to go along with my official "looks vaguely like me" Zen
priest avatar and clothes) but it is an interesting environment. I
encourage people to come [visit
Kannonji](http://slurl.com/secondlife/Snowlion%20Mountain////?img=http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3660/3334512400_eee266bc98_t.jpg&title=Visit%20Kannonji)
if they can install a Second Life player. (You can find the
[official](http://secondlife.com/support/downloads/?lang=en-US) one here
and, Emerald, the one I use,
[here](http://modularsystems.sl/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=3&Itemid=8).)
I also encourage people to come to Kannonji at 4:00 PM PDT on October 17
(tomorrow) to listen to Rev. Jiun's talk. I plan to attend and it ought
to be interesting. He will be conducting interviews and talking to
people afterwards as well.
[![Jigen
Avatar](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2540/4016271366_6f0daff14e.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4016271366/ "Jigen Avatar by albill, on Flickr")
