---
author: admin
date: '2009-01-21 12:46:45'
layout: post
slug: learning-go
status: publish
title: Learning Go
wordpress_id: '2632'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Technology
---

[![goban](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3411/3215396007_a7e9125cd2_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3215396007/ "goban")I've
been working on learning to play Go during this last week. Quite a few
of my friends are players, including several who met through the local
club in Seattle for it. For some reason, I've never learned to play over
the years even though I've been exposed to it here and there. I've been
a Chess player since I was a child, even being in the Chess Club in my
middle school in Utah. I'm not a terribly great player of Chess but I
manage to play well enough for sitting down with people and having a
game. I must say that Go is much more difficult to learn that I ever
found Chess to be. This may be because I learned one when I was a child
but the intricacies of Go are obviously going to take quite a while for
me to understand. I've played a bunch of computer games this last week
and find myself completely bewildered by what is going on in the game. I
haven't learned yet to see the patterns in play or to understand the
strategies (nor would I expect to in a week). So I find myself
completely bewildered by what my opponent is doing. I have found a nice
client for playing on my OS X machine, which is
[Goban](http://www.sente.ch/software/goban/). This is based on the [Gnu
Go](http://www.gnu.org/software/gnugo/) project. It is nice to see
something like this coming out of the open source world. I notice that
Facebook has a Go application that uses the Gnu Go code as well,
allowing one to play against other Facebook users. Currently, I'm just
playing the machines until I both work through some of my introductory
Go texts and simply play enough games to make sense of what is going on
during the game. If any of my readers are Go players and have
suggestions regarding the game and learning it well, please feel free to
comment.
