---
author: admin
date: '2009-07-17 22:20:15'
layout: post
slug: unconferences-for-buddhist-studies-or-religious-studies
status: publish
title: Unconferences for Buddhist Studies (or Religious Studies)?
wordpress_id: '2836'
categories:
- Academic
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Society
---

Once again, while working out, I did the untoward and started thinking.
It's amazing what quiet time will do for you. (Meditation doesn't count
since you're purposefully not letting your mind wool-gather and wander.)
What came to mind today was "Unconferences." The [Unconference
Blog](http://www.unconference.net/) defines an unconference (as opposed
to a conference) as "a facilitated participant-driven face-to-face
conference around a theme or purpose." In the context of
[BarCamp](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BarCamp), it is defined as "open,
participatory workshop-events, whose content is provided by
participants." The unconference is pretty well known in tech circles
through the various "camps", such as "[Foo
Camp](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foo_Camp)" and "BarCamp" and various
others that focus on technology. Outside of technology, it doesn't seem
to be as well known. Basically, they are conferences in which spaces and
structure (such as timeslots) are made available but the participants
create the sessions themselves, rather than having them proposed ahead
of time. Taking the Burning Man ideal of "no spectators" (in a sense),
everyone is a participant. Anyone with area expertise or knowledge can
create a session in which they will talk or create a panel and recruit
other people to be on it. The idea is that rather than being driven by a
top down approach where people submit topics (or are solicited for
specific topics) by a conference organizer or committee, the topics come
up from the participants in a bottom-up approach, often immediately
before or during an event. As far as I know, barring one example of a
science unconference hosted by Google, the unconference model hasn't
been applied in academia, certainly not within the Humanities. I started
wondering if it would be possible to do a Buddhist Studies unconference
or even a Religious Studies one. The difficulty would be in getting
people to gather in one place at one time. For a weekend event, space
usually isn't hard to come by if you know roughly how many people to
expect. I've attended Seattle MindCamp (before I moved here) and a
couple of unconferences locally and had an excellent time. I'm trying to
imagine if scholars and graduate students (not mutually exclusive) in my
fields of interest would actually take to this model or if it would be
something entirely too weird. At the very least, I could see organizing
one of these within the Graduate Theological Union, assuming there was
interest, amongst the graduate students since there are a lot of people
doing research and we are largely in the same geographical area. I'll
end with a [list of
resources](http://www.eventmanagerblog.com/open-source/20-resources-for-a-smooth-barcamp)
for running a BarCamp, which applies to most unconference events.
