---
author: admin
date: '2009-01-17 18:39:33'
layout: post
slug: e-sangha-watch
status: publish
title: E-Sangha Watch
wordpress_id: '2614'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
- Technology
tags:
- e-sangha
---

I've posted several times on the unfortunate way that
[E-Sangha](http://www.e-sangha.com/), a popular Buddhist forum, is
operated. It is run by a group of administrators and moderators who
disallow open discussion of Buddhist ideas if these discussions run to
interpretations with which the moderators disagree. This happens even
when these disallowed interpretations are actually traditional views in
specific traditions of Buddhism. They also have a policy of banning
individuals from the forum if a moderator dislikes the tradition of
practice of these individuals or if moderator decisions (or the sudden
disappearance of discussion threads or individuals from the site) are
discussed in public. A number of months back, the Soto Zen forum was
closed on E-Sangha after controversies surrounding the disagreement by
E-Sangha moderators with Soto Zen interpretations of Buddhism. The cover
story for this was that the forum data was corrupted during a site
update but people on the Soto Zen forum at the time reported that it was
because of ongoing disagreements with the moderators. Of course, since
E-Sangha moderators routinely delete or hide entire message threads and
ban users who mention missing threads, there is no way to "prove" any of
this. At least one Soto Zen priest, [Rev. Jundo
Cohen](http://treeleafzen.blogspot.com), has apparently discussed
opening a lawsuit against E-Sangha because of this activity. (I'm not
entirely in agreement with making this a legal dispute but I understand
why someone might attempt to resolve things that way given E-Sangha's
size and the way it draws in members of the online Buddhist community
without letter people know how it treats individuals, especially those
of certain Buddhist traditions.) Generally speaking, only members of a
number of Tibetan Vajrayana traditions seem to have a free hand in
discussions on E-Sangha and, even then, if they go over certain
doctrinal lines, moderators like "Namdrol" will suddenly make the
discussions disappear or simply ban the users, often with no explanation
since the messages explaining why one is banned are not accessible
post-banning. This has happened to at least one friend of mine recently
and happened to me before I was simply permanently banned from the site.
I've given up on expecting E-Sangha to change and have moved my online
activities to more interesting and open spaces but I received an e-mail
yesterday about a new site, [E-Sangha Watch](http://www.e-sangha.info/).
I have no idea who is running this site, which is dedicated to
monitoring the abuses on E-Sangha, and I have no connection to them. It
seemed worth mentioning here since a Google Search on "E-Sangha" tends
to bring a lot of people to my blog (one of my posts being the fourth
link on a Google search for E-Sangha, just after the links to the site).
Feel free to take a look. I would ask that the site operators, if they
read this post, identify themselves on the site. More openness or
transparency will help people see E-Sangha Watch as something useful
and, perhaps, reputable. As it is, I don't know the entire motivations
of those operating it but it does seem like they are doing the right
thing at this point.
