---
author: admin
date: '2009-03-20 15:51:12'
layout: post
slug: continuing-meditation-classes-with-rev-keisho
status: publish
title: Continuing Meditation Classes with Rev. Keisho
wordpress_id: '2712'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

[![Rev.
Keisho](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3068/2884395844_c021dc4d1c.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/2884395844/ "Rev. Keisho")
Last night, R and I attended the third of the thirteen classes that
[Rev. Keisho](http://www.caltendai.org) is teaching on Shikan
meditation. As far as I know, Keisho is the only "official" Tendai
priest in California (leaving out one or two others not recognized by
the powers that be). The focus of his classes on shikan (which is
shamatha and vipassana to the rest of you) is to spend half the series
going over the basics of the "shi" portion, which is calm-abiding
meditation, and the other half on the "kan," which is insight
meditation. For the insight portion, Keisho will be focusing quite a bit
on "recollection" in the form of recollecting the specific teachings of
the Buddha. This is interesting to me because my exposure to vipassana
is more through Tibetan methods where it involves penetration into the
mind once the calming has been achieved and much less recollection in
the sense of looking at the Buddha's words. We'll see if I'm
understanding his focus correctly once we get to that portion of the
class. Next week, while I'm out on retreat, he'll be finishing up the
shi portion and the following week, we'll put it into practice. Right
now, we open with a fairly standard Japanese opening of chanting
repentance, the ten precepts, and the Heart Sutra (in Japanese). When we
do the shamatha portion as a group, we'll be using a mantric method.
This places it in a different kind of space from the shamatha methods
that one experiences in Zen with its silent sitting or walking. We'll be
chanting a mantra for about 45 minutes (probably 1,000 times) to act as
the concentration method. I've done this plenty of times before as part
of my previous practice and I actually find it to be a quite engaging
method. As Keisho points out, it is **very** easy to tell when your
concentration slackens because you begin to screw up your recitation. He
mentioned the tendency of people to sometimes fall asleep or daydream
during silent meditation and I've been as guilty of that as much as any
meditator. While you can drift off while reciting, the voice/ear
connection acts as an excellent focus, especially when you throw a
visualization component into it as well. Keisho has been using the
manual written by [Zhiyi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhiyi) (Chih-i),
the founder of Tendai in China, as the basis of much of the class. He
handed out a simple outline of it that he had translated during the
second class. One nice thing that Keisho mentioned last night is that
there are recent translations of two of Zhiyi's works on meditation.
These are **[The Essentials of Buddhist
Meditation](http://www.amazon.com/Essentials-Buddhist-Meditation-Shramana-Zhiyi/dp/1935413007/)**
and **[The Six Dharma Gates to the
Sublime](http://www.amazon.com/Six-Dharma-Gates-Sublime/dp/1935413015/)**.
The publisher makes these available
[here](http://www.kalavinka.org/kp_book_pages/ebm_book_page.htm) and
[here](http://www.kalavinka.org/kp_book_pages/sgs_book_page.htm)
respectively for $10 each as files if you don't want or need the print
edition. There is also a nice article by Paul Swanson as well, **Ch’an
and Chih-kuan: T’ien-t’ai Chih-i’s View of “Zen” and the Practice of the
Lotus Sutra**
[available](http://www.nanzan-u.ac.jp/~pswanson/mhck/Chih-i%20on%20Zen%20and%20Chih-kuan%208-2003.pdf)
as well for those interested in reading more. I've been enjoying the
class. Attendance has been pretty limited, often just me, R, and one or
two other people. I wish more people attended as what Keisho is teaching
has real value and it is pretty rare to get the opportunity to study
with a trained Tendai priest who has made meditation one of his primary
practices.
