---
author: admin
date: '2009-06-17 15:03:41'
layout: post
slug: enabling-freedom-and-openness-with-mozilla
status: publish
title: Enabling freedom and openness with Mozilla?
wordpress_id: '2805'
categories:
- Hacking
- Mozilla
- Technology
---

[![Iran](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3413/3636246085_f9f1c2f6c4.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/3636246085/ "Iran")
Watching the twitterstorm around the current situation with the Iranian
elections has been fairly thought provoking. The Iranian protesters are
completely shut out of the official media in the form of newspapers,
radio, and television in Iran. These are under the thumb of the state at
the service of a man that may (or may not) have stolen an election for
himself. The only viable option is the use of the net and other direct
media communication, such as SMS. Of course, the state can block access
to net resources and has turned off the cell networks at various points.
Like the situation in China at times, people have found ways around
these blockages to continue to report and communicate with each other.
Going back to my day job here at the Mozilla Corporation, I wonder what
role, if any, we, the Mozilla community, can play in enabling freedom
and openness. We aren't specifically political as a group in the sense
that we have no vested interest in battling specific governments. In
fact, it is often in our best interest to be and be seen as neutral in
such things. That said, we are also interested in an open Internet and
an open Internet, **by its very nature**, has a political component
because it is the antithesis of the state controlled firewalls and
mechanisms of control that various authoritarian regimes like to put
into place. To the end of promoting an open Internet, is there more that
Mozilla could do with software to help enable that process? [Opera
Unite](http://unite.opera.com/) has gotten some press during the last
few days for facilitating the direct sharing of information over the
net, though it reminds me of the defunct
[AllPeers](http://www.allpeers.com/) software that went away last year.
I have friends that work on the [Tor
Project](http://www.torproject.org/), which has the explicit goal of
allowing anonymous communication between people. Tor actually targets
itself to helping dissidents, bloggers, and others that need to route
around state blocking and tracking. What kind of tools could Mozilla
incorporate into Firefox, for example, with its more than 100 million
users, that could help people in the future? I've advocated for Mozilla
to support the Tor Project before (which didn't really get beyond
getting more Firefox bugs fixed). I'd like to see us help create the
next generation of tools or even support and build in the next
generation for anonymous communication, networking, encryption and other
mechanisms. I've pointed out before how painful it is to send and
receive encrypted e-mail within Thunderbird (or through webmail services
like gmail) even though it has become clear that governments routinely
snoop on e-mail (even [the American
NSA](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/17/us/17nsa.html?_r=1&hp)) well
beyond what people have suspected. One of the reasons that I work at
MoCo is that we aren't driven by a profit motive, being owned by a
non-profit, and have an idea of social good built into what we do. I'd
like to see how that could be explicitly expanded. I'd love to hear
suggestions as I have only the most basic of ideas (such as making
encryption for communication easier or transparent or adding jabber
support into the Mozilla platform) and I'm sure others have far better
thought out ideas. Of course, I could be out to lunch and most people
don't care about such things. I somehow doubt if this is true though.
