---
author: admin
date: '2010-03-12 14:55:39'
layout: post
slug: nova-albion-steampunk-exhibition-this-weekend
status: publish
title: Nova Albion Steampunk Exhibition this weekend
wordpress_id: '3089'
categories:
- Daily Life
---

[![A
Gentleman](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3565/3670226570_ab33ca9bf5_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/danielproulx/3670226570/)I
will be attending the [Nova Albion Steampunk
Exhibition](http://www.steampunkexhibition.com/) this weekend with a few
members of the Norton Memorial Dicemaster's RPG group, the crew of the
airship Arcadia. (This is also the same weekend as our normal playing
session, so I expect to see more costuming during our meeting this
weekend!) Nova Albion is the regional steampunk gathering and it is
occurring about a mile or so from my home. I plan on posting many photos
and notes later on. My provisional schedule is below for the local Bay
Area people that I know who may also be going to the event. The
[Neverwas Haul](http://www.neverwashaul.com/) event on Saturday evening
is not at the hotel but it about three blocks from my house. It is
definitely worth seeing if you haven't been on the Haul before.

## Nova Albion Schedule

### Saturday

**IT ALL STARTED WITH A PUFF OF STEAM**Howard V. Hendrix (M), Mike
Perschon, Alexander Logan, Jean Martin, Liz Gorinsky The origin and
history of steampunk. *Saturday, 10:00 to 11:15, West Room* **THE PEN IS
MIGHTIER THAN THE STEAM**GOH James Blaylock, Liz Gorinsky, Francesca
Myman, Gail Carriger (M), J. Daniel Sawyer Steampunk voices in the
literary world, authors and editors discuss where steampunk is going and
where it has been. *Saturday, 11:30 to 12:45, West Room* **KINETICS,
MOVEMENT & ENGINEERING**Kimric Smythe, George Chlentzos, Patrick
McKercher, Dave Nutty, GOH Jon Sarriugarte (who will do a Tesla Coil
demonstration) *Saturday, 12:00-1:45, Placer Room* **STEAMPUNK GARB FOR
LIFE ON A BUDGET**Jade Falcon, Ryan Galiotto, Jean Martin, Gail Carriger
(M), Heather McDougal Modifying and adapting everyday wear. Making
steampunk gear out of found objects and clothing. *Saturday, 1:30-2:45,
West Room* **STEAMPUNK PHILOSOPHY**J. Daniel Sawyer, Mike Perschon (M),
Liz Gorinsky, GOH James Blaylock, Thomas Strange Is there a philosophy
behind steampunk? If so what is it? If not, what should it be?
*Saturday, 3:00-4:15, West Room* **STEAMPUNK TECHNOLOGY**GOH Jon
Sarriugarte, Patrick McKercher, Alexander Logan, Mark Anderson (M),
Heather McDougal Making and creating past inventions for the future.
Discussing the maker mentality, why the rise of steampunk, why now?
*Saturday, 4:30-5:45, West Room* **Neverwas Haul Visit** Saturday, 6:00
PM, 1010 Murray St, Berkeley, CA 94710 (three blocks from my house)

### **Sunday**

**JON SARRIUGARTE ON HOW TO USE YOUR STEAMPUNK GOGGLES**Maker Guest of
Honor Jon Sarriugarte presents on goggles in action: welding, sparks
flying and his various evil genius inventions, as well as the maker
mentality, and anything else that strikes his fancy. *Sunday,
11:30-12:45, East Room* **STEAMPUNK FANS IN ACTION**Chris Garcia, Mike
Perschon, J. Daniel Sawyer (M), Jean Martin, Liz Gorinsky Steampunk
zines, podcasts, websites, blogs, and more. For those who are involved
and those who want to be. *Sunday, 11:30-12:45, West Room* **METAL
MACHINING & MANIPULATION**George Chlentzos, Patrick McKercher *Sunday,
12:00-1:45, Placer Room*
