---
author: admin
date: '2010-05-20 00:49:21'
layout: post
slug: eff-geek-reading-cory-doctorows-for-the-win-audio
status: publish
title: 'EFF Geek Reading: Cory Doctorow''s "For the Win" Audio'
wordpress_id: '3148'
categories:
- Books
- Mozilla
- Notable People
- Science Fiction
- Technology
---

[!["For the Win"
Cover](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3371/4623835626_70f323a631_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4623835626/ ""For the Win" Cover")
I attended an [Electronic Frontier Foundation](http://www.eff.org/)
fundraiser this evening in San Francisco. [Cory
Doctorow](http://craphound.com/) has been in the Bay Area for a few days
on his book tour for his new novel, "[For the
Win](http://craphound.com/ftw/)." He was at Borderlands and Book, Inc.
and then a bunch of high schools (it is a Young Adult book, his second).
I chose to go to the EFF event as an EFF member to show support for it
and because I figured that Cory was more likely to speak about tech
related issues there, since he used to work for the EFF and much of the
audience would be geeks. Cory spoke for about an hour. He did a short
reading from the book (actually reading a section that I had just read
last night) and then did a brief talk on copyright and why it matters to
more than just authors. It was actually a bit different than the
"standard" speech on it that I've heard from him before and was classic
Doctorow in covering a bit of the current landscape in copyright and why
people should care, given that most of what happens on the Internet is
affected by this fight. I freely admit to being a huge fanboy of his
work. I've been reading Boing Boing since at least 2004 (and I've even
been
[boingboing'd](http://www.boingboing.net/2008/06/24/spooky-wonderful-mus.html)
once) and have read all of his novels as they've come out. Being a
professional computer geek that got his start in the late 1980s running
a BBS and hacking into the local university's unix machines and network,
I'm probably his ideal audience in many ways. That said, I think that he
has a lot to say and the Internet is everywhere today, affecting
everyone in our society. FTW is about union organizing amongst third
world gold farmers in MMORGs but the economics and the ideas about labor
and individual freedom and self-direction are applicable to anyone. I'm
planning on getting my daughter a copy of it now that she's 14 and old
enough to be reading his YA works. I contacted Cory about recording his
reading the other day. I've previously recorded him at [SF in SF with
Rudy
Rucker](http://www.archive.org/details/SFinSF_Cory_Doctorow_and_Rudy_Rucker)
and at the late [Cody's Books of
Berkeley](http://www.archive.org/details/CoryDoctorowlittleBrotherReadingAtCodysBooks)
when he was touring for "Little Brother," his last YA book. This was the
first time that he was heavily microphoned and the audio is clear but
hardly ideal quality because it was coming from large speakers and not
simply recording his normal speaking voice. He offered to have me
plugged into the sound board but, unfortunately, my current Edirol R-09
device can't handle XLR inputs so I was stuck with it on the table next
to him. I plan to post my review of his book in the next day or two when
I finish it. So far, I'm enjoying it quite a bit though I believe that
"[Makers](http://craphound.com/makers/)" will continue to be my favorite
by him. I have made the [audio
available](http://www.archive.org/details/EffGeekReadingCoryDoctorowsforTheWin)
at the [Internet Archive](http://www.archive.org). I have also embedded
it below for playback for those that wish to listen to it now.
[display\_podcast]
