---
author: admin
date: '2010-03-12 16:01:56'
layout: post
slug: what-is-open-source-buddhism
status: publish
title: What is Open Source Buddhism?
wordpress_id: '3107'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Society
- Spirituality
---

![image](http://www.openbuddha.com/images/white-buddha.gif)The moniker,
"Open Source Buddhism," has been used on this site for quite a while.
What this actually means is easily open to question and it seems worthy
of a longer discussion. "Open Source" is something that is generally
applied to software. As Wikipedia
[states](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source), "A main principle
and practice of open source software development is peer production by
bartering and collaboration, with the end-product (and source-material)
available at no cost to the public." The key idea is that the source
code, the programming, is available to everyone, as well as the end
result. This means that anyone is free and able to take the this source
code and work on a project, create a variant of it for their own
purposes, or otherwise be directly involved in the creative process of
the project. This is contrasted with closed source software, where the
code is not available but held behind copyrights, and people are only
allowed to be end users, consumers, of the result. Open source oriented
towards empowering individuals and encouraging them to contribute while
closed source is really about creating consumers and protecting
intellectual property. This latter has been the normal mode for software
business for quite some time but there are more and more companies
organized around open source projects, such as the Mozilla Project's
Firefox web browser. A key component of open source is peer production.
This is a form of joint collaboration by groups of individuals. It
relies on self-organizing communities of individuals who come together
to produce a shared outcome, result, or product. This same style of
organization, as well as the philosophy behind it, can be applied to
Buddhism as well. We are living in an era where we have access to extant
forms of Buddhism and the records and documents of many forms that do
not survive in a living form today. For those of us who are converts to
Buddhism, we do not have a vested national or cultural reason to embrace
a specific form of Buddhism over another. If one is Thai, for example,
it would make sense that the Thai form of Theravadan Buddhism would be
embraced and followed as a practitioner. Thai Buddhism is well
established in Thai culture, fulfills a variety of social functions, and
is deeply integrated in Thai society in a way that only various forms of
Christianity generally are in the Western nations. As an European
American, it does not necessarily make sense to embrace a very
culturally entrenched form of Buddhism. People do this and, for example,
take Tibetan names, where Tibetan clothes, and generally embrace a
culturally specific form of Buddhism. This is definitely one possible
path. An alternative to this is to look at the various forms of
Buddhism, evaluate the teachings and practices of them, and to work with
those aspects that make the most sense within a non-Buddhist culture
without the history and relationship to Buddhism that other nations and
peoples already have. The risk in doing this is shallowness and
dilettantism but these can be fought against by deeply engaging with the
material and working with Buddhist teachers from these traditions in a
wholehearted manner. This is not a call to abandon traditional forms of
Buddhism but is, rather, a decision to not necessarily be limited by
boundaries or practices simply because the form of Buddhism practiced in
a specific region or period had these limitations. While open source is
an amazingly democratic or even consensus driven process, this is also
not a call to abandon all hierarchy or leadership as an open source
Buddhism is developed. It is always recognized that there are
individuals with a breadth and depth of experience, knowledge, and
ability that place them in a position to teach others and lead them
further along the path. Ideally, an open source Buddhism will have
access to the teaching, insights, and practical techniques of all forms
of Buddhism. From these, the most applicable, the best, or the most
useful will be embraced, followed, and taught to others. I envision this
happening in conjunction with working within one or more of the existing
Buddhist traditions in the form of teaching and practiced passed from
mouth to ear by living teachers to students. This allows us to draw from
the best of both worlds, having the unbroken wisdom of over 2,500 years
of a living Buddhist lineage available but also being empowered to draw
upon other aspects of Buddhism that are not a part of this (or possibly
any other) living tradition. This allows practitioners, for example,
from a Japanese Soto Zen to work with Zen teachings and practitioners
from Korean schools while also studying traditions coming from as far
afield as Thailand or Tibet. Historically, this would not have often
occurred but we live in a potentially golden age for Buddhism. We have
access to resources unavailable to almost anyone in earlier eras when
travel and communication were so difficult. We should take advantage of
the full range of Buddhism in order to fulfill the overall goal of
enlightenment for all beings. As a part of this, we should also endeavor
to establish practice groups, sanghas, and organizations that embrace
the principles of open involvement and peer production. While we do not
need to democratically elect our monks or abbots, we should embrace
equal participation while recognizing the role of expert and experienced
teachers as spiritual friends, especially when they have often taken
vows to dedicate their lives to this end. There is no need to reproduce
historical authoritarian structures of top down rulership in this
environment. It is possible to balance the role of experts and leaders
with the strength and diversity of our fellow practitioners. To this
overall end of creating an open source Buddhism, I've begun adding
materials to the [Open Buddha](http://www.openbuddha.com) website in
order to make it more than just my personal blog. Eventually, if there
is interest, I would like to add documents and resources from many
parties and a forum, if there is interest. This will take many parties
to participate to be truly successful but I do believe that this is the
direction of Buddhism in the West is heading, whether it is explicitly
recognized or not.
