---
author: admin
date: '2010-09-24 21:11:24'
layout: post
slug: an-expansion-of-the-five-mountain-buddhist-seminary-presence-in-second-life
status: publish
title: An Expansion of the Five Mountain Buddhist Seminary Presence in Second Life
wordpress_id: '3313'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
- Technology
---

[![Five Mountain Seminary Sim -
1](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4084/5021316933_87c2681420.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5021316933/ "Five Mountain Seminary Sim - 1 by albill, on Flickr")

The [Five Mountain Sangha](http://www.fivemountain.org/) has been
running a distance-based non-denominational Buddhist seminary for a few
years now, the [Five Mountain Buddhist
Seminary](http://www.five-mountain.org). This was originally created in
order to educate our own priests and sangha members (I am an ordained
priest within the Five Mountain Order). This was necessary because we do
not have a single primary physical center of activity. Our presiding
teacher, Rev. Paul Dōch’ŏng Lynch, resides in Southern California.
Another of our senior priests (not me) resides in the Bay Area. We have
another priest and center in Cincinnati, Ohio. In addition to this, we
have members in New England and Texas as well. To accommodate such a
physically separated group, we have set up retreats where we gather but
also have embraced the use of Internet technologies, such as Skype,
Second Life, and e-mail lists for information sharing, training, and
student/teacher interaction. Once we established the Five Mountain
Buddhist Seminary for our own students, we realized that it might very
well have utility for others so we opened the program up to people who
are not members of our own sangha. While our orientation is primarily
one focusing on Zen Buddhism, we accept students that embrace any
Mahayana school of practice. Over the last year or more, we have been
experimenting with the use of Second Life as an adjunct technology for
the distributed members of the school. I've [blogged
about](http://www.openbuddha.com/2009/10/16/the-dharma-of-second-life/)
[](http://www.openbuddha.com/2009/11/16/how-to-miss-the-point-of-sl-and-the-dharma/%3Ethis%20before%3C/a%3E.%20Recently,%20we%20decided%20to%20make%20it%20more%20central%20to%20the%20school%20in%20our%20ongoing%20efforts%20to%20make%20improvements%20to%20our%20program.%20We%20had%20previously%20been%20using%20space%20gratefully%20donated%20to%20us%20by%20%3Ca%20href=)Kannonji
in order to host talks and student/teacher interaction. In the last
couple of weeks, we've set up our own sim in Second Life. What this
means in practical terms is that we are hosting our own space in Second
Life instead of borrowing space from another group. This gives us a lot
more freedom in controlling how the space is set up, the range of
activities we can support, and the complexity of the space and the
tools. We aren't borrowing resources from others now and can prioritize
things as we wish.

[![Five Mountain Seminary Sim -
10](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4131/5021317529_30f632c46e.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5021317529/ "Five Mountain Seminary Sim - 10 by albill, on Flickr")

The outcome of this is that we have a much larger space to host seminary
activities. Starting this October, we will be holding incoming student
orientation within the new sim in Second Life and using it for ongoing
group meetings between students and faculty. Since Second Life supports
group voice discussions, we can host lectures and classes, do question
and answer meetings, and student teacher interviews. Those of us who are
faculty in the seminary program will also begin to hold regular office
hours in the new sim. I've posted a few images of the sim here and put
up a [photo
set](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157624902853011/) on
flickr as well. I encourage anyone interested in visiting us in Second
Life to feel free to [come check us
out](http://slurl.com/secondlife/Five%20Mountain/121/106/22).

[![Five Mountain Seminary Sim -
11](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4106/5021924510_7c7773db47.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5021924510/ "Five Mountain Seminary Sim - 11 by albill, on Flickr")
