---
author: admin
date: '2010-08-30 23:44:30'
layout: post
slug: visiting-dharma-cousins-in-las-vegas
status: publish
title: Visiting Dharma Cousins in Las Vegas
wordpress_id: '3218'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

[![Main Building -
2](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4116/4942399442_83ab920634.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4942399442/ "Main Building - 2 by albill, on Flickr")\
The Zen Center of Las Vegas
This last weekend, I was in Las Vegas for the second time in a month. I
had been there a month ago for the Black Hat and Defcon computer
security conventions. Generally, I only go to Vegas when my work sends
me since I don't really drink, gamble, or womanize. This time, I came
back for a Zen retreat. When I told people that I was going to Las Vegas
for a Zen retreat, everyone seemed utterly shocked. They would ask me,
"There's Zen in Vegas?" I'd tell them that of course there was. Zen can
be found in most major cities but the cognitive dissonance seemed to be
pretty big for a lot of people. I shouldn't have been too surprised
because I had only been vaguely aware that there were Zen practitioners
there before quite recently. I was invited to attend by one of my
teachers, [Rev. Paul Dōch’ŏng Lynch,
JDPSN](http://www.oezc.com/guidingteacher.html). He is the head teacher
of the [Five Mountain Sangha](http://www.fivemountain.org/) in which I
was ordained last year. This retreat was the first multiple day one held
at the [Zen Center of Las
Vegas'](http://www.lasvegaszencenter.com/Welcome_to_Las_Vegas_Zen.html)
brand new temple. They have been around since the early 1990's but had
recently acquired two adjacent houses and refurbished one into being
their new center. They did a wonderful job as well as you can see below
and on my [flickr photo
set](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157624841568414/with/4941822171/):
[![Dharma Room -
1](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4082/4941811495_149b8d7e5c.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4941811495/ "Dharma Room - 1 by albill, on Flickr")\
The Dharma Room
[![Pool -
1](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4101/4942399738_64b55dc8f8.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4942399738/ "Pool - 1 by albill, on Flickr")\
The View Across the Property
The retreat was a Yong Maeng Jong Jin (in Korean) or "to leap like a
tiger while sitting" retreat. These are generally three or seven day
intensive retreats, similar to the Japanese Zen sesshins. The Zen Center
of Las Vegas (hereafter "ZCLV") is a member of the [Kwan Um School of
Zen](http://www.kwanumzen.org/), the largest Zen organization in the
West, which practices a form of Sŏn, or Korean Zen Buddhism. The school
was founded by Zen Master Sŭngsan and it is where Rev. Lynch originally
trained before Sŭngsan's death in 2004. [Rev Thomas Kwanjok Pastor,
JDPSN](http://www.lasvegaszencenter.com/Guiding_Teacher-Las_Vegas_Zen_Center-Great_Bright_Zen_Las_Vegas-Thom_Pastor.html)
is the guiding teacher at the ZCLV and one is also one of Rev. Lynch's
closest friends. Because of this close relationship and history, we were
invited to participate in this inaugural retreat at the new temple by
Rev. Pastor. I found the retreat to be very interesting. In a sense,
that's not actually true. The practice of the retreat itself, the
sitting and walking meditation, the morning and evening ceremonies, and
the interviews for koan work, were all not terribly unusual. We used the
forms of the Kwan Um School but since we are, ultimately, derived from
that school and its founder, they were almost the same as what we
practice within the Five Mountain Sangha. What was interesting to me was
to see how our Dharma cousins at the ZCLV practiced, interacted, and
otherwise went about their normal practices. They did things slightly
differently, emphasizing different aspects of practices, and had a
little bit of a different outlook than what I've sen at our own Five
Mountain Sangha retreats. It was close enough to not be terribly alien
but just different enough that it stood out from time to time. I was
fortunate to have the opportunity to help officiate at a precepts
ceremony for a Five Mountain Sangha member, Glenda, who is also an
occasional student of mine. The ZCLV was kind enough to allow us to hold
our ceremony separately from their own during the retreat, which also
allowed me to see how they did the same ceremony. Again, same but
different. I also had an excellent opportunity to interview with Rev.
Pastor and engage in koan work with him. I am very grateful for that. I
also found the sangha members of the ZCLV to be overwhelmingly friendly,
engaging, and welcoming to us. It would have been easy for them to not
know what to make of the four of us who participated in their retreat
but they didn't treat us as anything other than fellow members of the
Buddhist sangha. They even invited us to come back, reminding those of
us from California that they are only a short flight or drive away. I
know that I feel like I definitely have a welcome place to go when I
find myself in Las Vegas. It is nice to know that the Dharma can be
found in a city that I've often thought of us exemplifying everything
that is wrong with American culture and society. It turns out that I was
wrong and places like the ZCLV are beacons of sanity in a desert there.
**Update:** Rev. Lynch has put his pictures of the precepts ceremony up
as well
[here](http://picasaweb.google.com/FiveMounatinOrder/RetreatZCLVAug2010#).
He has also written his own [blog
post](http://zenmirror.blogspot.com/2010/08/zen-center-of-las-vegas-retreat.html)
about the retreat.
[![image](http://lh3.ggpht.com/_bfe_Pji6A0E/THypO3brIQI/AAAAAAAALUI/Vm6xqjh3IG4/s640/IMG_6271.JPG)](http://picasaweb.google.com/FiveMounatinOrder/RetreatZCLVAug2010#5511466116857929986)
