---
author: admin
date: '2010-04-09 10:00:31'
layout: post
slug: zen-and-the-art-of-dating
status: publish
title: Zen and the Art of Dating
wordpress_id: '3116'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Humor
- Spirituality
---

*This is a guest post by
[Shane](http://zenfant.wordpress.com/about-zenfant/) as part of the
[article swap, part
3](http://preciousmetal.wordpress.com/2010/03/22/article-swap-pt-3-pairings-announced/)
within the Buddhist blogoshphere. I am posting over at [Peace Ground
Zero](http://peacegroundzero.wordpress.com/) today. - Al* Hi everyone
and welcome to article swap 3. I’m posting here at Al’s house and Jomon
is posting over at mine regarding [Zen and
Food](http://www.zenfant.wordpress.com/). When I started writing on this
post, I was approaching it with a discursive and relative based mind. I
wanted to look at how Zen had made me approach dating
differently…hopefully better. I wanted to explore how non-attachment and
equanimity could be balanced with passion and romance. I wanted to know
how I could be equanimous when what I really wanted to do was jump some
bones or engage in an argument. I found myself approaching Zen and
dating in a very non-Zen way. So I said to myself…”self…what the fuck?”
In the practice of Zen meditation, the brain moves toward a state of
being very quiet. So quiet, in fact, that it stops it’s normal thinking
and perceiving processes. Different teachers and different flavors of
Zen have a variety of ways of describing the quiet and it’s aspects…no
mind, equanimity, illuminated mind, etc…the problem being that when you
are in such a quiet state of no thinking and no language, trying to
describe it in words usually comes out sounding kooky as shit (at worst)
or somehow inappropriate (at best)…’the buddha is a shit
stick’...seriously? More to the point it can be difficult to say how Zen
and the art of anything really works out because Zen is beyond words.
Talking about Zen and dating is like talking about Zen and the sky. We
end up talking about the clouds and weather patterns when what we really
want to experience is the sunlight. Here are a few of those clouds
chosen randomly for you (some are quotes that caught my eye, some are
responses from friends whom I asked for feedback from, some blog post
quotes, some book quotes, etc). Fellow Dharma Punk David says “I think a
lot of people in Buddhism have this idea that 'enlightenment' or
'non-attachment' means some kind of automaton, some stoic, emotionless
robot that does not want or desire anything. I suspect that it is little
more like having a little space between those desires and our actions.”
This touches on an idea that I have had as I’ve been going thru this
most recent dating experience. Practicing Zen meditation has allowed me
the space to see my attachments for what they are and disempower them. I
have had a strong “ugly duckling” complex all my life that has led me in
the past to gravitate either to men who would make me ok or men who I
felt were worse off than me whom I could fix…makes it damn hard to find
an equal. For once in my life, my boyfriend and I are on equal ground.
Refreshing or scary?...well, depends on how much meditation I’ve had :-)
With enough meditation, it’s neither…the situation just is exactly as it
is. Fellow blogger [Jomon](http://nothingtoattain.blogspot.com/) (and
also my [guest post writer](%3Ca%20href=) for this article swap) wrote
me a response which I will include a bit later. What I want to put in
this spot is her description of her feelings on her [Zen wedding
day](http://nothingtoattain.blogspot.com/2008/06/happy-anniversary.html)
when she was the most awesome Zen Bride. She says “I was nervous,
excited, trembling, tearful, joyful, irritated, tired, panicked and
peaceful, sometimes all at once.” Now if that don’t express the
experience of being in a relationship at all stages, I’m not sure what
does. I had some hope that being a “good” meditator would make me immune
to these things, but what I did that was an improvement for me, was to
decrease my attachment to the feelings as well as having to make
unnecessary meaning out of them. Zen has taught me experientially that
meaning making has a shit ton more to do with me than it does with the
situation. (as an old counselor, I knew this as book knowledge, but in
my old age I finally got it as a practice) My mentor (Zentor?) Flint
says “Most men want to find that special partner that will save them -
from whatever - and make it all better, as if love really does conquer
all. But there is no person, no practice, no teacher, no nothing that
will save you from life as it is, and that is what practice makes
possible, facing life as it is,” and “Sometimes we meet someone and it
is as if we say, one way or another, "Life is kind of a challenge. Want
to do it with me?" That's about it. Everything else is drama. Ain’t that
the shit? That’s why when I feel my ass is in a crack, this is the man I
email for guidance. I love thinking of a relationship as defined by
‘Life is kind of a challenge. Want to do it with me?’. That is something
I can do that allows both me and my boyfriend to be exactly who we are
and no one has to fix anybody else. And another from Jomon… “if it ain't
broke don't fix it”. Amen sister. From Chan Master Sheng Yen (as one of
the OG’s of Chan…Chinese for Zen…he is the shit…I get so much out of his
teachings that I had a very hard time deciding what to use, but I think
this quote really hits to the core). “When you awaken and vexation (his
translation of Dukkha) becomes wisdom, you will understand that the past
mind is no different from the present mind. Therefore, there is no need
to resent your mind of vexation. Simply practice hard, and quite
naturally this mind of vexation will become the mind of wisdom.” I think
I chose this quote because it feels like I have come around full circle
and dating is still dating but I’ve reduced my vexation about it. (I
just love the word ‘vexation’, it feels like using a beautiful antique
as if I were wearing a top hat and tails as I write this) To bring this
craziness to some kind of close, I want to sum up this random ball of
Zen and dating into some short ideas that will help me to keep my head
on correct (not straight...you thought I was going to say straight, but
fact is I’m a big old fag). Shit is still shit and my Zen shit don’t
make shit any less shit than it is Don’t make shit up cuz you’ll
probably be wrong and it’ll be your shit and not his shit that’s the
problem anyway If shit ain’t broke don’t fix it Don’t worry about your
past fuck ups cuz all shit is now Life is kind of a challenge. Want to
do it with me? :-)
