---
author: admin
date: '2010-07-15 15:36:07'
layout: post
slug: going-to-san-quentin-soon
status: publish
title: Going to San Quentin Soon
wordpress_id: '3201'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Society
- Spirituality
---

[![Prison](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4136/4797093235_1163fb2b13.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4797093235/ "Prison by albill, on Flickr")
I've received word back that I am now approved to visit and on the
visitor's list for San Quention. SQ is the big (and fairly famous)
prison in the Bay Area of California. What many people don't know is
that it is also a facility with an incredible amount of volunteers and
volunteer work. There are all kinds of groups and individuals meeting
with inmates to try to help their lives or give them opportunities.
There has been a Zen sangha there for ten years or so. Most of the
volunteers for it are affiliated with the San Francisco Zen Center or
East Bay Community of Mindful Living. It meets every week on Sunday
evening and has a fairly regular population of inmates during its
existence, though people do tend to come and go as inmates get
transferred around, released, or simply move on. A number of years back,
I spent about a year and a half volunteering at McNeil Island in
Washington State (the only surviving prison on an island, as far as I
know). This was in a Neopagan context, working with a friend who had
been running a group out of the chapel there for a few years. My own
practice was transitioning to Buddhism at this point but he needed help,
effectively running a one man shop on his own. I began helping him and
quickly wound up running things as he was forced to go to Iraq for our
lovely war there. Eventually, I simply couldn't maintain the level of
commitment involved, especially with the prison being hours and a ferry
ride away, but I have been wanting to go back to working with inmates.
The group at San Quentin, with its large volunteer pool, is a good
opportunity to get back into this sort of thing. It's only a 25 minute
or so drive away on the other side of the Bay. As I've mentioned to
people before, prison really strips things to their essentials for a lot
(if not all) people. The inmates have so little control over their lives
and, really, so little to actually **do** that they wind up having a lot
of things that we all tend to ignore in our lives made unavoidable. They
have nothing but time to think and, if so inclined, they have ample
opportunity something as straightforward as a meditation and study
practice. Given the barrenness of life in prison, as well as the
stresses, anything that can be done to support inmates in practice
should be done, in my opinion. This is leaving aside the unfortunately
large part of the population that thinks inmates should be locked away
for life, treated like animals, and forgotten by society while they are
being punished. That doesn't really play well with Buddhist ethics
though. These people made mistakes, often many of them, and are, justly
or not, paying a price for them. Cause and effect is karma in its
essential form. That being true, they are still not any different than
you or me and you have to ask yourself, when working with inmates, how
easily it could be you on the inside there. I've certainly wondered at
times. It is important to treat them as people and give them
opportunities. If they don't choose to avail themselves to them, that's
one thing, but it is one of the best ways to help them turn their lives
around when they want to do so. We have one of the largest prison
populations in the world and these are men and women that are shit upon
by society, even once it is all over. The Dharma is for everyone, not
just for supposedly perfect people. **Everyone!**
