---
author: admin
date: '2010-05-06 11:16:41'
layout: post
slug: off-the-grid-life-on-the-mesa
status: publish
title: 'Off the Grid: Life on the Mesa'
wordpress_id: '3136'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Society
---

I recently watched a documentary, "Off the Grid: Life on the Mesa,"
about the community in the untown of Mesa, New Mexico. You can watch the
trailer for it below or on
[Youtube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgTGPJtvmS8). Reason.com had
[an
article](http://reason.com/archives/2007/06/01/desert-autonomous-zone)
on the film that I read a few years back. It was an interesting film for
me. The people that live in this community, and it really does seem to
be a community, are people that don't want anything to do with "normal"
society, for whatever reason. The film states that there are about 400
people on the Mesa. A lot of them appear to be veterans who are pretty
alienated society because of the trauma of war, addiction issues, and
the like. Some people are aging hippies and countercultural types.
Others are runaways and those that just cannot fit into society. These
are people that don't want to deal with society anymore and often feel
that the only way that they can live free is to opt out of the world. Of
course, they create their own world in doing this. It would be quite
easy to watch this film and judge these people as somehow being really
odd but I am actually of the opposite mind on this. These people are
really "just folks" like you'd encounter anywhere. I'm of the firm
opinion that people overestimate the amount of supposed normality in the
people we live around in our neighborhoods or that we encounter in
day-to-day life. People are weird, strange, and often troubled or
unhappy. This is true in the cities as much as it is true in any off the
beaten path community. It is easier for people to hide this in cities
since we are effectively anonymous from our neighbors and treat other
people as strangers. Just about any of the people highlighted in the
interviews in "Off the Grid" could be living in your neighborhood,
struggling with their issues. It is just that much more obvious when
they remove themselves from the seemingly normal struggle of our
consensual reality that call our society and congregate as a community
of misfits. I felt an overwhelming sense of compassion for the personal
difficulties that each of these people discussed during the course of
the film. Like I said, they are just folks and their troubles are really
no different than anyone else's except for, in some cases, degree and in
their way of attempting to deal with it. I definitely think it is an
interesting film. I did find myself wishing that some of the Burners
(Burning Man folks) that I know would go out there and help these folks
out with some infrastructure and building issues. The engineer in me
kept thinking "You could have some nice decentralized infrastructure and
some quality in your building with just a little work" but then I'm a
geek. I do wish that there were more options for people to create
alternate communities without having to build everything from scratch on
their own. People are so alienated or isolated from others that they
feel online in their troubles and oddness. It would be interesting to
see attempts to create places where people were encouraged to make
places by Mesa but a bit more organized (internally) and maybe slightly
less random and crazy but still leaving space for people to experiment
with other way of living than what we tacitly allow. Unless you are the
kind of person that can find an existing community or gather people and
resources to create one from scratch, it is a daunting task to want to
engage in an alternative way of living without knowing how to do so or
to find like minded people who may feel the same. I've been fascinated
with intentional communities or alternative ways of living for most of
my life, all the more so as someone on the spiritual fringe of America,
but I've never wanted to be a lone nut (or nut with a family) building a
compound off in woods or joining one of the rare successful communities
that often are organized around a specific philosophy or ideal. As it
turns out, you can watch the entire film online at snagfilms.com, which
was a surprise. Feel free to go [give it a
watch](http://www.snagfilms.com/films/title/off_the_grid_life_on_the_mesa/)
if this sounds interesting to you.
