---
author: admin
date: '2010-09-09 12:37:20'
layout: post
slug: chinul-and-the-hwadu-meditation
status: publish
title: Chinul and the Hwadu Meditation
wordpress_id: '3263'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Notable People
- Spirituality
---

[![Chinul](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4150/4974301729_3885951339_m.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/4974301729/ "Chinul by albill, on Flickr")*This
was originally written as a short paper for a seminary class on
[Chinul](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinul) and Korean Sôn at the
[Five Mountain Seminary](http://www.five-mountain.org/). I thought
people might appreciate some of the content though it is a bit long for
a blog post. Hwadu is part of my own practice within my overall work
with kong-ans, which I tend to avoid discussing here (as with most
aspects of my personal practice).* Chinul lived in the latter half of
the 12^th^ century and the beginning of the 13^th^ of the Common Era on
the Korean peninsula. While Buddhism was well established within Korea
by the time of Chinul, there were strong divisions between the existing
scholastic oriented schools and the later established schools of Sôn,
the Korean form of Chán or Zen, that had become popular through the
influence of Chinese Chán schools and masters. Chinul is considered by
many to be the effective founder of Sôn, even though he is not in
actuality, because of his work on healing the divisions between the two
forms of Buddhism and his ecumenical approach and systemization of Sôn
teachings using the texts revered by the scholastic schools to
legitimize the Sôn approach. In addition to this work in systemization
and reconciliation, Chinul was also an innovator, regularizing and
introducing meditative practices that later became essential components
to Sôn and, eventually, all of Korean Buddhism through the eventual
cultural dominance of Sôn. Later, even when the Sôn of his period was
eclipsed by later developments, many of his practices and teachings
remained in use. A key innovation of his within Sôn was his introduction
and elaboration of kong-an or *hwadu* practice from Chinese Chán. To
this day, his methods of *hwadu* are still practiced within Korean
temples, commentaries are written on its methods, and *hwadu* is
considered to be the key practice of Sôn monasticism. This paper
examines *hwadu*, its practice, and how it fits within the overall
meditative teachings of Chinul. Unlike most Sôn practitioners of his
era, Chinul was a scholastic student of the sutras and Buddhist
commentaries as well as a meditative practitioner. While nominally
having a Sôn teacher, in practice, his studies and practice were
solitary and self-directed. Partially as a result of this, he engaged in
textual studies, uncommon in Sôn, as a primary component of his practice
and this proved to play a key role of his personal realizations and
later teachings. During the course of his textual studies and the
associated contemplation of these texts, Chinul had three main
enlightenment experiences, each building on the previous. Each of these
experiences led to one of the primary methods of Sôn practice that
Chinul taught (with the later addition of two more methods elaborating
on these initial three). Chinul’s first enlightenment experience was
while studying the *Platform Sutra*, leading to Chinul’s teachings on
cultivating *samadhi* and *prajna* deriving from that text; the second
experience was while studying the *Exposition of the Avatamsaka Sutra*,
leading to faith and understanding practices; the third and final
experience was while studying the *Records of Ta-hui*, leading to
Chinul’s teaching of *hwadu* techniques. The cultivation of *samadhi*
and *prajna* practices are similar to the existing *shamatha* and
*vipassana* practices found elsewhere in Buddhism, especially in China.
They teach methods for stilling and calming the mind from its normally
turbulent state and how to then use the developed concentration coming
with this stillness to investigate the mind and its nature, reflecting
the mind back onto itself. The eventual goal of these practices is to
cultivate direct knowledge of the original enlightenment of all beings,
the Buddha-nature or original mind. This cultivation occurs after the
practitioner undergoes an initial enlightenment experience or flash of
understanding of the original mind that then provides the basis of faith
to fuel continuing practice. Chinul belonged to the dominant (and only
extant) school of Chán (or Sôn in Korean) that used this method of
Sudden Enlightenment followed by Gradual Cultivation. The *samadhi* and
*prajna* cultivation practices are based on this model of the way to
realization or awakening as set forth in the *Platform Sutra*. The faith
and understanding practices taught by Chinul are derived from the
Hua-yen school of China, whose teachings were absorbed into Chán, and
its teachings based on the Avatamsaka Sutra. These practices involve the
gradual cultivation of understanding using discriminative thought after
the initial sudden awakening or enlightenment experience. Unlike most of
the other methods used by Chinul, the faith and understanding practices
make great use of conceptual thought and contemplation based on study of
Buddhist texts and philosophy. These first two methods of practice, the
cultivation of *samadhi* and *prajna* and the practices of faith and
understanding, both work within the conceptual or discriminative mind of
the practitioner. They are based on the study of doctrines and the
practice of methods that can be easily conceptualized rationally or
logically. Because of this, they are subject to the limitations of the
rational mind. According to Chinul, the nature of original mind or
Buddha-nature is beyond all conceptualization or thought. This means
that these practices two methods of practice cannot lead the
practitioner all the way to realization as taught by Chinul because the
practitioner will still have only a conceptual understanding of original
mind, even if all defilements or obscurations are removed or great
understanding of doctrine is attained. These are practices that are
based solely on words, according to Chinul, and ultimate realization is
beyond words. Chinul states in his *Excerpts from the Dharma Collection*
that the two methods above will lead the practitioner to understand all
of the doctrines within the Buddhist sutras and texts, which point to
the nature and characteristics of the mind, but the practitioner will be
“bound by intellectual understanding and never gain tranquility”
(Buswell, 1991, p. 182). The third method of practice, *hwadu*, is meant
to be the solution to this problem or limitation since it bypasses
Buddhist doctrines and conceptual understandings and enters a path that
leaves behind all words. *Hwadu* is derived from the Chán schools of the
middle T’ang dynasty of China and developed over a number of generations
during the most diverse period of Chán’s growth. The *Records of
Ta-hui*, Chinul’s most immediate acknowledged source, was written only a
generation before Chinul lived and he may have been exposed to teachings
relating to it and *hwadu* during his earlier years of practice through
contact with Chinese practitioners. Initially, *hwadu* practice was
quite fluid and based on exchanges between a master and a student in
which one party asks the other a question and a response is given that
demonstrates the realization of the original mind. These exchanges were
eventually written down and preserved in collections by students and
came to be called *kung-an* or kong-ans (or koans as they are known in
English commonly), which translates to “public case records” (Buswell,
1991, p. 68). Buswell states that there is some evidence that the first
uses of practices similar to koans may date to the Fifth Patriarch of
Chán Buddhism, Hung-jen, but its later use and codification was
popularized by Ta-hui Tsung-kao, who wrote *Records of Ta-hui* read by
Chinul. In its earliest form, *hwadu* is the portion of a koan that
forms the central point or core topic of it and can be considered its
key. As it developed later, it can be best understood as “the point at
which (or beyond which) speech exhausts itself” (Buswell, 1986, p. 219).
These koans and their attached *hwadu* form a puzzle of sorts. At an
intellectual, rational, or logical level, they make no sense. If they
are treated simply as an intellectual puzzle, they appear nonsensical,
almost like a bit of nonsense text quoted from *Alice in Wonderland*,
for example. The words can be read rationally but their meaning will
elude you because the nature of the exchange is transcending speech and
rationalization. According to Chinul, while koans are a form of speech
and, therefore, of rational thought, they go beyond the limits of
rationality, showing where intellectual understanding reaches its
limits. Chinul also points out that the *hwadu* acts as a purification
device that wipes away conceptualization or thoughts, leaving the mind
open to the unconditioned or original mind that is beyond all ideas,
speech, or discrimination. Chinul quotes Ta-hui in Chinul’s *Excerpts
from the Dharma Collection*, stating that in true *hwadu* practice “you
need only lay down, all at once, the mind full of deluded thoughts and
inverted thinking, the mind of logical discrimination, the mind that
loves life and hates death, the mind of knowledge and views,
interpretation and comprehension” (Buswell, 1991, p. 185). Chinul taught
initially that this was the shortcut method of enlightenment only
accessible for superior practitioners, but near the end of his life he
shifted more and more emphasis on *hwadu* as the best or ideal vehicle
for realizing enlightenment for all followers of the Dharma. In his
*Excerpts from the Dharma Collection*, Chinul quotes what is,to many,
the quintessential *hwadu* (the first one of the famous kong-an
collection, *The Gateless Gate*): “A monk asked Chao-chou, ‘Does a dog
have the Buddha-nature or not?’ Chao-chou replied, ‘Mu! [No!]’”
(Buswell, 1991, p. 185). This is a seemingly nonsensical exchange in
that, as taught in Mahayana Buddhist doctrine, all living beings have
Buddha-nature. So the monk is asking what is, on its surface, an obvious
and absurd question, and Chao-chou is giving an answer that, by existing
doctrine, makes no sense. At its most obvious, it is clearly not true
that a dog has no Buddha-nature. How can a Chán master, an awakened
teacher, give an answer that is seemingly wrong and contradicts the
Buddhist teachings? In discussing this *hwadu* and instructing how to
work with it, Chinul says that *Mu* is:

> …the weapon which smashes all types of wrong knowledge and wrong
> conceptualization. [1] You should not understand it to mean yes or no.
> [2] You should not consider it in relation to doctrinal theory. [3]
> You should not ponder over it logically at the consciousness-based.
> [4] When the master raises his eyebrows or twinkles his eyes, you
> should not think he is giving instructions about the meaning of the
> *hwadu*. [5] You should not make stratagems for solving the *hwadu*
> through the use of speech. [6] You should not busy yourself inside the
> tent of concern. [7] You should not consider it at the place where you
> raise the *hwadu* to your attention. [8] You should not look for
> evidence in the wording. Throughout the twelve periods and the four
> postures, try always to keep the question raised before you and
> centered in your attention. Does a dog have the Buddha-nature or not?
> He said mu. Without neglecting your daily activities, try to work in
> this manner. (Buswell, 1991, pp. 185-186)

This instruction on how to work with the *hwadu* is at the core of
Chinul’s method. Here he clearly states that a *hwadu* is not a clever
bit of rhetoric to decrypt or a story problem to be followed to a
logical conclusion. It is not a trick or a game played by a master. He
says that one must keep the question constantly in mind. In actuality,
Chinul taught two different methods for *hwadu* investigation, one
superior and one inferior, depending on the ability or capacity of the
practitioner. These two methods are the (1) investigation of the idea or
meaning of the *hwadu* and (2) the investigation of the word itself.
Chinul calls these “dead word” and “live word” investigation,
respectively. In the example of Chao-chou’s *Mu* above, understanding
what Chao-chou’s intent in mind was in making his statement to the monk
is the method of investigating the idea or dead word. This investigation
of the idea was considered to be a more approachable or beginner
practice for those of lesser ability or capacity because it allowed for
an intellectual understanding of the *hwadu*. It requires the use of
intellectual thought and conceptualization to approach an understanding
of the intent behind the statement of the *hwadu* but does not require
anything beyond this level of understanding. The result of this method
is a conceptual understanding of the *hwadu* but this will not open the
way to the final realization of one’s original mind, according to
Chinul. What it can do is bring about the initial realization of sudden
enlightenment that forms the basis of later gradual cultivation as
taught by Chinul and all descendants of the Southern School of Chán.
This means that investigating the idea fulfills the initial role of
developing the necessary faith for the path of sudden enlightenment /
gradual cultivation as a method of practice, just as the previous two
methods of *samadhi* and *prajna* or faith and understanding. It can
provide the impetus for following the path of the Dharma to final
realization. The second approach to *hwadu*, the investigation of the
word, is the more advanced practice. This method does not allow for any
conceptualization or intellectual approaches to the *hwadu*. For Chinul,
this is the true *hwadu* practice that leads to ultimate realization. In
the example of Chao-chou’s *Mu,*the investigation of the word is looking
directly at Chao-chou’s answer, *mu*. There are no concepts to be
grasped, simply the word, *mu*, by itself. In Chinul’s teachings,
because there is nothing for the conceptual mind to grasp, this method
frees the mind from the activating consciousness, *vijnana*, which
separates the world into subject and object, and that gives rise to our
deluded minds and suffering. The method frees the mind by generating
doubt (or wonder, puzzlement, or questioning). This creates a state of
doubt and questioning in which rational thought and conceptual
understanding cannot operate. As the tension and pressure of this doubt
grows, it leads to the exhaustion of the discriminating mind and into a
state of no-mind, as taught in the *Platform Sutra*. In this state of
no-mind, the original mind or Buddha-nature can be apprehended since
discriminating consciousness with its thoughts and conceptualization is
no longer in the way. For Chinul, this was the highest practice that
would act as the shortcut to enlightenment, bypassing the need for
continuing gradual cultivation over time . Rather than simply studying
doctrine and cultivating *samadhi* and *prajna* or faith and
understanding, *hwadu* allowed those able to engage in it the means of
bypassing the Dharma contained in words to the realization of the mind
of the Buddha and all of the patriarchs of Chán, the transmission that
occurs outside of words when the original mind is realized. Chinul’s
methods for studying and practicing the Dharma are still used as the
basis of practice in Korea to this day. As Buswell relates from his time
as a Korean monastic in the 1970s, the practice of *hwadu* is one of the
primary methods, if not *the* primary method, used still. Chinul defined
a set of practices, culminating in *hwadu* as the most advanced and
direct, that have been used for more than 800 years on the Korean
peninsula. While the cultivation of *samadhi* and *prajna* allow for the
calming of the mind, the deepening of concentration, and the
investigation into the mind, and those of faith and understanding
develop both a faith in and understanding of Buddhist doctrine, neither
is thought to lead to immediate realization. It is only the *hwadu*
taught by Chinul that acts as the means of going beyond
conceptualization and doctrines to a direct apprehension of the mind.
Because of this, it remains in constant use as the preeminent method
within Sôn.

**References**

Buswell, R. (1983). *The Korean Approach to Zen: The Collected Works of
Chinul*. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. Buswell, R. (1986).
Chinese Meditative Techniques in Sôn Buddhism. In P. N. Gregory (Ed.),
*Traditions of Meditation in Chinese Buddhism* (pp. 199-242). Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press. Buswell, R. (1991). *Tracing Back the
Radiance: Chinul’s Korean Way of Zen*. Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press. Buswell, R. (1992). *The Zen Monastic Experience*. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. Keel, H. (1984). *Chinul: The Founder of the
Korean*Sôn*Tradition*. Berkeley: University of California, Berkeley.
