---
author: admin
date: '2010-10-24 18:30:31'
layout: post
slug: ace-monster-toys-at-the-east-bay-mini-maker-faire-today
status: publish
title: Ace Monster Toys at the East Bay Mini Maker Faire Today
wordpress_id: '3352'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Hacking
- Technology
---

[![Sean and the Ace Monster Toys
Table](http://farm5.static.flickr.com/4130/5112158309_f3a86dc10f.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5112158309/ "Sean and the Ace Monster Toys Table by albill, on Flickr")

I and other members of [Ace Monster Toys](http://www.acemonstertoys.org)
spent the day at the [East Bay Mini Maker
Faire](http://ebmakerfaire.wordpress.com/) today in Oakland, California.
AMT had contacted the faire about having a table for presenting projects
and such. We wanted to support the efforts to have a maker oriented
event in our own back yard. Now that we're finally a legal entity (and
one with a space to boot!), we also wanted to get the word out locally
that we exist as well. The faire was great though I bet it was a mixed
bag for the organizers. Sunny California entered its Fall/Winter mode
which means "rainy season." It's been coming down for the first time in
months starting yesterday. It was just showers at first but, by today,
it had become a pretty strong downpour, which lasted until 30 minutes
before the faire ended (of course!). This caused Ace and other groups to
have to relocate to interior spaces and for a lot of groups and people
to huddle under hastily put up awnings. The Park Day School, where the
event was held, has a lovely four acre campus and it was too bad that
people couldn't enjoy it as much. Now, that said, I saw hordes of kids
with parents all day so the overall turnout looks to have been good. I'm
glad because I think it is a good event and I want to see it repeated in
the future.

[![Children and
trike](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1203/5112161717_186746b1a0.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5112161717/ "Children and trike by albill, on Flickr")

AMT had a table right inside the entrance of the Studio One space, where
most of the tech projects and groups wound up. We set up a table with 2
1/2 functioning makerbots (one fully functioning and two somewhat
functioning, including my own, which I was working on as I sat there).
We spent most of the day printing out objects and talking to people
about makerbots, our hackerspace, and hackerspaces in general. I expect
that a few people will be coming to check us out in the next few weeks.

[![Christian explains the magic of
making](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1374/5112159255_2bec7129e4.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5112159255/ "Christian explains the magic of making by albill, on Flickr")

I put a [photo
set](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157625234566442/) up on
Flickr of my photos from the day.
