---
author: admin
date: '2011-04-10 21:12:17'
layout: post
slug: original-steampunk-revisited-a-review-of-jeters-infernal-devices
status: publish
title: Original steampunk revisited, a review of Jeter's "Infernal Devices"
wordpress_id: '3684'
categories:
- Books
- Science Fiction
- Technology
---

![image](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5141/5608189451_3b93093041_m.jpg)This
last week, I read the reissue of [K. W.
Jeter's](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K._W._Jeter) classic steampunk
novel, Infernal Devices. This is being released in the next month by
Angry Robot and I managed to score a review copy from them. Jeter hasn't
written much in the last decade. I'm not sure what he's been up to and
his [bio page](http://www.kwjeter.com/biopage.html) doesn't help... The
bulk of his work was during the 80's into the early 90's. For those
unfamiliar with his work, he was pretty influential in his heyday,
considered by some to be amongst the cyberpunk authors. I fondly
remember reading "Farewell Horizontal" and "The Glass Hammer" when I was
a teenager. Jeter has the claim to fame of actually having coined the
term, "steampunk," in a 1987 letter as a kind of a joke given the
attention that cyberpunk was getting at the time. Infernal Devices was
originally published that same year and is definitely an example of the
ur-steampunk novel. Our protagonist is one George Dower, the inheritor
of a watchmaking business from his deceased (and almost entirely absent)
father. The period is vaguely Victorian or Edwardian and the setting is
London. George isn't much of a watchmaker. In fact, he seems entirely
inept at his inherited trade. His father, though, was a genius with
gears. It becomes clear over the course of the novel, Dower Sr. did not
limit himself to the creation of watches but created all manner of
clockwork mechanisms, both large and small, and his clientele was, shall
we say, often questionable. The story opens with Dower the Younger
addressing his reader, stating that he is writing his account to attempt
to clear his own sullied name and to defend himself, even though he
knows it will do little good. Dower describes how a number of odd
individuals enmeshed themselves in the mechanism of his life through the
vehicle of his father's devices. For the most part, these devices act as
a macguffin, with people chasing hither and yon after one or more of
them (though more and more of them come to the forefront over time).
Dower Jr. has the unfortunate quality, so necessary in a protagonist, of
not leaving well enough alone and seeking the answer to mysteries. Now,
he seeks these largely because of his nearly penniless condition
(servicing his father's lesser creations with the help of Dower Sr's
assistant does not pay well) but, like a character in a horror movie, he
always decides that it might be time to give up and quit about two
minutes after he has lost the option of doing so. Overall, I found this
to be an enjoyable read and I can see why it gained the good reputation
it had when it was originally released. There are mysteries to be
investigated, churlish companions, villains, both hidden and obvious,
and a heavy dose of clockwork and victoriana. Some may find George's
language, as he narrates the events, both directly and through his
breaking of the wall between he and his readers in writing his account,
a bit difficult or distracting at first. I enjoyed Iain M. Banks'
"Feersum Endjinn" and Neal Stephenson's "Anathem," both with reputations
for purposefully difficult language, but I still found Dower's voice a
bit distracting initially. In time, it does grow on the reader and
becomes much less of an issue (if any) and it definitely adds atmosphere
or tone to the tale. For my friend's interested in a steampunk novel,
especially one of the original ones (predating the current craze by two
decades), this is well worth a read. The book definitely holds up well
in comparison to the current steampunk books (in fact, it is better than
quite a few of them). You can find it on
[Amazon](http://www.amazon.com/Infernal-Devices-Angry-Robot-Jeter/dp/0857660969/)
as either a paperback or ebook on April 26. I've embedded a sample of
the first 50 pages below (flash is required for this...).

My next step after this book (with a side jaunt to "The Strange Affair
of Spring Heeled Jack") is Jeter's sequel to H. G. Wells' Time Machine,
[Morlock
Night](http://www.amazon.com/Morlock-Night-Angry-Robot-Jeter/dp/0857661000/).
This is also being reissued this month and I've never been able to track
down a copy of it before now.
