---
author: admin
date: '2011-02-22 11:05:18'
layout: post
slug: diy-book-scanner-in-progress
status: publish
title: DIY Book Scanner in progress
wordpress_id: '3442'
categories:
- Daily Life
- Hacking
- Technology
tags:
- Ace Monster Toys
- bookscanner
- ebooks
---

I don't blog as often on the out and out geeky side of things here very
often right now but I wanted to share a project that I've been working
on. Along with all of the Buddhist things that I do, I am a founding
member of a hackerspace and spend a significant amount of time each week
with hackers hacking (along with my job working on the Firefox web
browser). I own a lot of old or obscure books. Many of these are from
small publishers who disappeared long ago. I've been moving more and
more to ebooks during the last two years but I own something like 8,000
or more books. I'd like to preserve a lot of the hard to find books and
something to scan them would make it easier to do so. I've stood over my
share of digitizing photocopiers to facilitate them but they work slowly
and often badly. Unfortunately, most of the time the easiest ways to
scan a book will destroy the same books. There are other solutions
though...

[![DIY Book
Scanner](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3506/4008586795_853b2e06b3.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pugno_muliebriter/4008586795/ "DIY Book Scanner by PugnoM, on Flickr")\
*A current laser cut book scanner*

Yesterday, I went over to [Ace Monster Toys](http://www.acemonstertoys),
my local hackerspace here in Oakland, to work on a [DIY Book
Scanner](http://www.diybookscanner.org/). Daniel Reetz came up with this
idea a while back for cheaply and easily scanning in books into
computers without cracking the spine on his books. You can see a
presentation that that Daniel did at Google recently below (or here):

A lot of people have taken it and run with it, spawning improvements,
since Daniel's original book scanner. This technology is very similar to
what Google used for their giant bookscanning project with various
universities except done on the cheap. It consists of a simple rig,
normally made out of wood. It has a cradle to support the book, open and
face up, a platen made of glass or acrylic to hold the pages flat, a
lower end digital camera focused at each page, and lighting. This is
connected to a computer to process the images as they come in. Wired's
Gadget Lab wrote [a blog
post](http://www.wired.com/gadgetlab/2009/12/diy-book-scanner/) about it
a bit over a year ago. Myles, whom I know from AMT, and I decided that
we wanted to work on one of these. I had suggested it as a project but
hadn't gotten around to trying to implement it. Myles jumped on grabbing
some appropriate cameras (Canon 480s) and we arranged to get together to
work on it yesterday. Some people create very fancy and professional
book scanners with nicely engineered parts that they paint, wrap,
finish, wrap in special boxes, etc. We're at a hackerspace and, really,
we just care if it works. This is our first time so we figured it would
be a learning experience. Myles scoured the forums at DIYbookscanner.org
to find the simplest and most elegant design that both worked and which
we could build. Neither of us are exactly master craftsmen so ease of
building was a factor. We decide to go with the ["New
Standard"](http://diybookscanner.org/forum/viewtopic.php?f=1&t=333)
design being developed by Daniel Reetz. The end result should look
something like:

[![The "New Standard" Book
Scanner](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5253/5468874940_405f949c9e.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5468874940/ "The "New Standard" Book Scanner by albill, on Flickr")\
*Our Model*

Yesterday, we went to home depot, bought a bunch of parts and began
working on the base. This is a square frame with a pair of drawer rails
mounted inside. A platform is mounted on these rails and then the cradle
to hold the book sits on it. The important parts, other than making it
relatively even, is that the rails need to allow the cradle to slide
back and forth in order to center different sized books under the platen
and camera. The cradle needs to be adjustable on this platform to
accommodate the spine and pages of both large and small books as well.
The cradle needs to be angled at a right angle in total so the pages of
the books will directly face the cameras above. While we were working on
it, Stefan from AMT (who does have some wood working skills) was around
and wound up getting sucked into helping us. After five hours of work,
we managed to get the based entirely put together with the exception of
mounting the last two pieces of the cradle where you place the book. I
put a [photo
set](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157625981974143) up on
Flickr with our current progress. The end result of yesterday's work is
this:

[![image](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5135/5466792381_e326af7756.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5466792381/ "Untitled by albill, on Flickr")\
*All your base are belong to us*

We're going to get together later in the week to continue the work.
Myles has put together a linux virtual machine that contains the
software to process the scanned images. He's also doing more electronics
work. The tricky part will be the platen because it requires a lot more
detail work to have it function correctly. Once that is put together, we
just need to mount the lights and cameras and start tweaking the whole
thing. **Update:**: Here is an interesting animated gif of the laser cut
book scanner that I found online:

![image](http://www.wired.com/images_blogs/gadgetlab/2009/12/bookscanner_lazy_susan.gif)
