---
author: admin
date: '2011-05-18 23:50:01'
layout: post
slug: pagan-dharma-a-new-beginning
status: publish
title: Pagan Dharma - A New Beginning
wordpress_id: '3755'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
- Technology
tags:
- blog
- pagan dharma
- spirituality
---

Earlier today, at the encouragement of my friend, Catherine, and a few
others, I set up [Pagan Dharma](http://www.pagandharma.org) at
pagandharma.org. I also set up a
[twitter](http://twitter.com/pagandharma) account for the site to be
used for announcing postings. Below you will find the post that I just
[added to the
site](http://www.pagandharma.org/2011/05/caught-between-worlds-or-a-pagan-dharma/).
I am reposting it here because Pagan Dharma currently has no readers or
visibility so I want to let people know what is going on there. Feel
free to add comments here or, even better, go over to pagandharma.org
and add them to the post there!

* * * * *

[![image](http://www.pagandharma.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/pagan-dharma-logo.png "Pagan Dharma Logo")](http://www.pagandharma.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/pagan-dharma-logo.png)

This post is partially an explanation of why this site, [Pagan
Dharma](http://www.pagandharma.org) has been created. The other day, I
was speaking with my old friend, Catherine. Catherine and I went to
college together 20 years ago this year. We met through the pagan
student group at the University of Washington as undergraduate students
there, circled together on and off, were in a magical order together
later, dated some of the same people, and are still friends through all
of this. These days, Catherine and I are both basically Buddhists. She
practices a form of Chinese Chan, which is really the kissing cousin of
my own [American form of Korean Zen](http://fivemountain.org/). Before
all of this, we were both card carrying members of American Neopagandom.
In many ways, we still are though, and that was where my conversation
was coming from. While we both very much identify with a spiritual
tradition, that of the Buddha, which is not "pagan" in the sense of the
20th (and now 21st) century neopagan movement, it is very much a pagan
one in any classical sense. Additionally, speaking for me, my cultural
outlook and how I relate to the world spiritually is still very much
influenced and informed by the nearly 20 years I spent as a pagan. My
orientation to the sacred, this world as a lived thing, and how I go
about my life and ritual is as much that of a neopagan and a magician as
it is that of a Buddhist. I'll allow Catherine to speak for herself on
this site but I think it is very much the same for her. I had the idea
of putting up a site that looks at the Dharma, the teachings and way of
being derived from the Buddha, from the point of view of being a pagan,
in whatever loose sense we want to define that. It is easy enough to put
a site up and so much of Buddhism as taught in the West derives from a
much more Protestant (or even occasionally Jewish) way of interacting
with the world and basic mindset. What does a pagan dharma look like?
I'm interested in finding out. In talking to Catherine, she is
interested in talking about this as well. The hope is that perhaps
others will find this of interest and contribute to the potential
community here as well. This site will act as a vehicle for some essays
by the pair of us and possibly by a few other pagan Buddhists that I
know. I've also added the capability to have groups and forums so we can
communicate with each other in an ad-hoc fashion. Maybe nothing much
will come of it but it never hurts to try and I can use an excuse to
inflict my thoughts upon the world. More of this sort of thing can
occasionally be read on my blog, [Open
Buddha](http://www.openbuddha.com), along with some hackerish and geeky
things as well.
