---
author: admin
date: '2011-03-28 14:23:08'
layout: post
slug: just-back-from-five-mountain-sangha-2011-spring-retreat
status: publish
title: Just back from Five Mountain Sangha 2011 Spring Retreat
wordpress_id: '3647'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Daily Life
- Spirituality
---

[![image](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5173/5566700895_253b4b9356.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5566700895/ "Five Mountain Sangha by albill, on Flickr")\
*The Five Mountain Sangha Retreat Group*

I just returned yesterday evening from the [Five Mountain
Sangha](http://www.fivemountain.org) 2001 Spring Retreat. The FMS is the
organization of Korean Zen within which I am a priest and practitioner.
We are a geographically dispersed group, with members on both coasts and
several states in between. In order to facilitate together action and
the bonds of the order (and our practice), we have at least one short
retreat a year that brings as many people as possible together. This
year, we met at the [Zen Center of Las
Vegas](http://www.lasvegaszencenter.com), run by [Rev. Thomas Pastor,
JDPSN](http://www.lasvegaszencenter.com/Guiding_Teacher-Las_Vegas_Zen_Center-Great_Bright_Zen_Las_Vegas-Thom_Pastor.html)
of the Kwan Um School of Zen. Rev. Pastor is an old and good friend of
[Rev. Paul Dochong Lynch](http://www.fivemountain.org/teacher.php), our
guiding teacher, and has gone out of his way to be welcoming to us and
allowing us to make use of his center. Because Las Vegas is, well, Las
Vegas, it is actually very easy for people to get there from all over
the country. Many of us at the retreat have been quite active in the
[Five Mountain Seminary](http://five-mountain.org/), which is used as
part of our training for priests within the Five Mountain Sangha (though
not everyone in the school is part of our sangha or training to be a
priest). I received my diploma as the first graduate of the school at
this retreat (**w00t!**). I also got a chance to see people from classes
that I have been teaching within it. This helps improve our ability to
connect and communicate within the school since we use
[Moodle](http://moodle.org/) as the means of running a distance-based
program, supplemented with phone calls and/or skype audio and video. For
the retreat, a few of us arrived on Wednesday night, with the rest on
Thursday, to have some informal time together before the start of the
retreat around 5:30 AM on Thursday morning. We had teachers from
California and Ohio working with Rev. Lynch in guiding students in
kong-an (koan) practice, as well as meditation work. For those
unfamiliar with this sort of retreat, we normally have sessions of
sitting meditation followed by short sessions of walking meditation.
While people are engaged in these practices, we have interviews (one by
one) with a teacher or teachers to work on kong-ans with which we are
already working or assigned in particular during the retreat.

[![Zen Meditation:
Serious-Business](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5222/5568724193_b7db4f75d8.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5568724193/ "Zen Meditation: Serious-Business by albill, on Flickr")

In between the sessions, we have a work period, meals, Dharma talks, or
similar activities until we go to bed around 10:00 PM in order to get up
early the next day and do it again. Because this was one of our few
opportunities to get everyone together in the same room, we also tend to
do precepts and ordination at the same time. We ordained several people
at this retreat (congratulations!), I took the 74 Bodhisattva Precepts
(as I was already a priest), and another priest was confirmed as a
teacher. We also had a chance on Sunday to practice with some of Rev.
Pastor's students, who came to sit with us for the morning (the time of
their normal Sunday service). This also gave all of us a chance to do
kong-an interviews with Rev. Pastor, which is always an interesting
addition, especially after a couple of days with the other teachers and
their poking and prodding! All in all, it was an excellent chance to see
people that I speak to quite often virtually over skype, on e-mail
lists, or in online classes, but so rarely see in person. I have a
**lot** of photos up in my [flickr set for the
retreat](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/sets/72157626242214913/)
for those interested. I was taking photos during much of the ordination
ceremonies.

[![Kinhin: Sometimes I Feel
Pursued...](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5021/5568735375_8e457cb99c.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/albill/5568735375/ "Kinhin: Sometimes I Feel Pursued... by albill, on Flickr")
