---
author: admin
date: '2011-05-08 10:49:40'
layout: post
slug: article-swap-nate-of-precious-metal-on-the-role-of-tradition
status: publish
title: 'Article Swap: Nate of Precious Metal on the Role of Tradition'
wordpress_id: '3722'
categories:
- Buddhism
- Spirituality
---

*As part of the [2011 Article
Swap](http://preciousmetal.wordpress.com/2011/04/11/article-swap-2k11-part-one-pairings-here/),
the following piece was written by Nate from [Precious
Metal](http://preciousmetal.wordpress.com) on the role of Buddhist
tradition in the current age.* I want to thank Al for being part of the
Article Swap, and for hosting me here today. I was a bit unsure how to
approach the topic that Al chose, which is my thoughts on the role of
tradition in Buddhism in the current age. I thought a lot about it, and
the complexities of it. I could write a book on the subject, especially
considering the scope of Buddhism in the world. So, I figured I'd
whittle it down a bit and concentrate more on the US/ North American
region. The topic engenders a multitude of different directions, but
stripping away everything, the core should be something like, do
cultural traditions translate well in todays world? Specifically, as
folks travel to other parts of the world, does the cultural leanings on
Buddhist tradition from their country ring true for those that are now
learning from that teacher/ mentor? Ever since Buddhism made it's way to
the shores of the US, like elsewhere in the world, it has adapted. The
first temple in the US was built in 1853, though it wasn't until the
1950's- 1960's that we really started to see Buddhism take root on this
soil. The influx of Buddhist masters during this time seemed to coincide
with the need for Dharma teachings to be transmitted. Masters from all
over the world, such as Japan, China, Korea, Tibet and more descended on
the US like a charge of locusts. You had guys who were setting up
temples and centers, and others that had been invited into homes to
teach smaller, more intimate groups. Zen seemed to adapt well, and
really became a solid foundation for future. As His Holiness The Dalia
Lama's profile became a media spotlight, the Tibetan tradition gained
some steam to, and due to it's popularity, grew at a quick rate.
Statistically though, according to the Pew Forum, the three major
branches of Buddhism have roughly the same amount of followers. Due to
the variations in each school of Buddhism, it gives the seeker an array
of options to choose from. While one tradition may have a bit more
ritual practice, one might chant quite a bit, and others might engage in
more meditation. Each school, contrasted with the others, are at the
core the same. Like flavors of a lollipop, there is a Buddhism for just
about everyone. For the most part, things will remain the same for
Asians in the US. For those that have immigrated here and have a
heritage steeped in Buddhism, the role it plays in their lives will
continue. The traditions they carry with them are an important part of
their lives, in a new country it helps keep them grounded with where
they came from. Sometimes, these cultural traditions have actually
become a stumbling block in relations with American Buddhist
counterparts. Some of the more "purist" folks look down on Westerners as
if we/ they are some sort of infidel to their religion. As if we are not
able to comprehend the true meaning of the Dharma and so we are
unworthy. This dichotomy has at times strained relationships, and turned
off some Americans. With that, we're already seeing the emergence of
various forms of Buddhism in the US, which may or may not exemplify
where the tradition is going. A couple of these forms are Engaged
Buddhism and Secular Buddhism. Engaged Buddhism isn't something
completely new, [Thich Nhat Hanh](http://www.plumvillage.org/) could be
considered the "grandfather" of this movement, but recently it seems to
be growing more and more. Engaged Buddhism can be summed up as a
practice that involves taking our meditation routines and our dharma
practice into social and political situations. There are a number of
organizations that exist that exemplify these practices such as [The
Prison Dharma Network](http://www.prisondharmanetwork.org/), [Buddhist
Peace Fellowship](http://www.bpf.org), [Zen
Peacemakers](http://www.zenpeacemakers.org/), [Liberation Prison
Project](http://www.liberationprisonproject.org/),
[The†Interdependence†Project](http://www.theidproject.org/)†and more.
These groups, and the people involved, are highly active and believe the
Dharma is not just an on the cushion activity. Some of the teachers that
are attributed to the Engaged Buddhist practice are [Bernie
Glassman](http://www.zenpeacemakers.org/about_zen_peacemakers/bios/bernie_bio.htm),
[Robert Aitken](http://www.robertaitken.net/), [Fleet
Maull](http://www.prisondharmanetwork.org/staff_board.html),[Roshi Joan
Halifax](http://www.upaya.org/roshi/), [Bhikku
Bodhi](http://www.bodhimonastery.net/bm/ven-bhikkhu-bodhi/16-dhamma-teachers/30-ven-bhikkhu-bodhi.html)
and more Secular Buddhism is growing because of it's more practical
approach to Buddhism. I do not consider myself to be a Secular Buddhist,
but the methodology for inquiry has peaked my interest. Secularist's
believe that Buddhism should be stripped down, to take away the
religious aspects, and practice what they believe in something that more
closely resembles the practice of the Buddha himself. One of the
preeminent teachers, and proponents of Secular Buddhism, is [Stephen
Batchelor](http://www.stephenbatchelor.org/). His books lay out the
groundwork for skepticism of ritual practice in Buddhism, and belief in
such teachings as karma an rebirth. One of the main reference points for
Secular Buddhists is the teaching in the [Kalama
Sutta](http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/soma/wheel008.html).
We are also seeing the manifestation of some young teachers who adhere
to specific lineages and traditions, but teach in a †manner that a lot
of younger folks can relate to. Whether you are a punk, a†metal-head†or
consider yourself a geek, there are people to learn and take inspiration
from. You've got [Noah Levine](http://www.dharmapunx.com/), who's
referred to in some circles as the†Tattooed†Bodhisattva, author of books
such as "Dharma Punx", "Against The Stream" and his newest offering "The
Heart Of The Revolution". His first book spawned a small movement
of†tattooed†punks bucking the idea that Buddhists need to have this
clean and proper exterior shell. His students believe that Buddhism is
similar to the punk rock movement in the way they are both radical,
rebellious forms. I tend to agree and enjoy his books, and dharma talks,
immensely. He recently opened up shop at the [Against The Stream
Buddhist Meditation Society](http://www.againstthestream.org/) in Los
Angeles. [Brad Warner](http://hardcorezen.blogspot.com/) is another one
that does not fit in the box. His books, such as "Hardcore Zen", "Sit
Down and Shut Up", "Zen Wrapped In Karma Dipped In Chocolate" and "Sex,
Sin and Zen" can be, and are to some, controversial. I'm not of that
belief, I think his books are very necessary today as he cuts through
the bull, he is by far a "cookie cutter" Buddhist. The controversy with
Brad comes from his columns he has written for the soft core porn site,
The Suicide Girls. There are a variety of other Buddhist teachers and
groups that are worthy of mention, that again, have stepped outside of
the box. You've got Ethan Nichtern, of
[The†Interdependence†Project](http://www.theidproject.org/), who's
project falls under the Engaged Buddhism idea I was talking about
earlier. For those of us that are little more geek-ish, there are the
[Buddhist Geeks](http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/conference/) podcasts.
Buddhist Geeks was founded by†Vince Horn and Ryan Oelke. BG started in
2007 and has grown so much, this year they will be running their own
[conference](http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/conference/). We are still
very new to this Buddhism thing here in the US, and as our personal
relationships grow, so will our spiritual relationships. The Dharma, in
theory, with all of it's schools and lineages will become just like the
rest of America, a big melting pot. I believe wholeheartedly, as time
passes, a boiled down, palatable version of Buddhism will emerge. We are
beginning to see small hints of it, but there is still to much
divisiveness for something like that to take hold just yet. -- Nate
